Hercules’s visual and textual representations have been naturalized as a self- evident case of classical revival and celebration of virtuous citizenry or exemplary rulership. Instead, this study takes neither classically informed political values nor the spectacle of masculinity for granted, and it considers personal as well as public resonances of the popular imagery. The Renaissance Hercules is an insis- tent, assertive statement of particular kinds of masculine identity, ones, furthermore, laden with the burdens of masculine ideals beyond attainment. Yvonne Tasker has observed of Hollywood action movies that ‘The body of the male hero . . . provides the space in which a tension between restraint and excess is articulated.’3 The same can be said of Hercules, for the strain of forging mascu- linity is worked out in very physical, laboured ways. Furthermore, the kind of masculinity on display was often sensual and sometimes conveyed homoerotic appeal.
RENAISSANCE HEROICS AND MASCULINE LABOUR
Popular perception tends to equate ‘Hercules’ with ‘hero’ and to think in terms of brawny action and ideal masculinity. Ancient heroes, however, were a rarer (though still male) breed, far from Hollywood or tabloid proclamations. The Greek word ‘hero’ was, as Norman Austin points out, ‘an honorific title accorded by a community to a distant and legendary personage, whom the community vener- ated as its primordial ancestor . . . Whether in cult or in the epic tradition derived
 632
DOI:10.1111/j.1467-8365.2008.00635.x ART HISTORY . ISSN 0141–6790 . VOL 31 NO 5 . NOVEMBER 2008 pp 632-664 & Association of Art Historians 2008. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  1 Detail of (plate 11) Michelangelo Buonarroti, Labours of Hercules, c. 1530. Red chalk. Windsor: Royal Library. Photo: The Royal Collection r 2008 Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
from local cults . . . [he] achieved his full heroic status only after death, when he was honored as if he were a god’.4 Hercules was of this category, a mortal apotheosized upon death, sired by the highest divinity, Jupiter, but of a human mother, Alcmene. True to his mixed parentage, the demigod’s mythic saga represents him engaging in both flawed and ideal behaviours.5 Renaissance authors, artists and viewers grappled with that complexity, experimenting with the multivalent connotations of masculinity put to the test.6
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 633

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 Visualizing a republican boast as Florence formulated an expansionist programme of righteous might against supposed tyranny during the late four- teenth and early fifteenth centuries, appropriated later in the Quattrocento to populate the Medici Palace of that city when the dynasty cleverly adopted civic traditions to support their own claim to power, Hercules also featured in North Italian courts and was a popular subject for portable statuettes and multiple prints. The producers and audiences of this variable Herculean model were primarily male, although women were also increasingly exposed to domestic and public renditions of masculine strength.7 Tommaso Spinelli’s three daughters, betrothed in the years 1458 to 1460 at the ages of seven or eleven, were instructed in the imagery of love and masculine desirability by seeing in their Florentine courtyard sgraffito images of naked (but genitally masked) youths, Cupid letting loosehisarrow,andHerculesovercomingtheNemeanLion.8 Waitingbetweensix and nine years before actually marrying, the girls came to expect vigilant, vigorous grooms.
At the large wedding of 1473 that joined Ercole d’Este of Ferrara with the daughter of the king of Naples, Eleonora of Aragon, prestigious and numerous guests gathered in Rome to enjoy sugar sculptures representing the labours of Hercules (Ercole in Italian) and the staged ‘dance of Hercules’, during which that heroic character won a mock battle against centaurs.9 In later years Italian troupes of acrobatic actors would entertain crowds with ‘the Antiques, of carrying of men one upon an other [which] som [sic] men call Labores Herculis’, feats not only named for their physical endurance but also, perhaps, for their resemblance to the manner in which Hercules defeated the marauding giant Antaeus by holding him off the ground.10 Hercules’s image and his strenuous exploits – especially the struggle to the death against Antaeus – were popular with an Italian elite that could afford to commission or purchase reproductions of the masculine action figure in a variety of media, including paintings, manuscripts, statuettes,prints,tapestriesandhatbadges.11 Variedinpoliticalallegiance,rank and location, that buying public consumed a suggestion not so much of victory but of stress, of public heroics under pressure, of a youth deciding his future conduct in the Choice at the crossroads, of an elder statesman tested to his physical and psychic limits, especially at Omphale’s court and when experiencing fits of raging madness, of a classical icon animated almost beyond endurance in his numerous Labours. He had to work at his masculinity.
When standing still, resting between labours or after them all, when he can luxuriate in his victories, the demigod is muscular, confident, usually posed in a contrapposto stance, implying movement, an ephebe or adult man of glorious bodily beauty and alertness (see plate 2).12 However, he was from time to time shown as a revelling drunkard barely able to stand, his character flaws brought to the fore after the strain of recurrent rages and labours. A Bolognese bronze statuette from the 1490s has the ageing hero reclining inelegantly, clutching a vinebranchandsleepingafteraboutofindulgence.13 Inscribedontheunderside with the words ‘promoter of virtue’ which praise the patron and antiquarian Gaspare Fantuzzi, the sculpture perhaps spurred learned companions at his convivial table to appreciate its variation from the seated precedent of antiquity, the Hercules Epitrapezios statuette that had the ‘guardian spirit of the temperate board’presideoverthemealsofnumerousancientworthies.14 Thelearnedwitof
634 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 the Renaissance figurine was all the keener for the ironic interplay between virtue and excess, labour and rest, strength and weakness, ideal and reality, dignity and pathos, encapsulated in the literal inversion from seated hero to splayed demigod.
In narrative or exemplary depictions Hercules was also complex, sometimes appearing as a character whose gender and sexuality were multiple ascriptions. As Erwin Panofsky uncomfortably recognized in passing, the pulpit in the Pisan Baptistery, carved by Nicolo Pisano around 1260, cast ‘Hercules in the feminine role of Fortitude’.15 The semantics of personification and allegory meant that the abstract quality being represented, like Fortitude or Painting, was usually embodied in static, female form, thereby accentuating the distance between actuality and the higher ideal. Occasions of gender slippage in the allegorical process are often telling sites of contradiction or ambivalence, and Hercules is no exception. Seemingly a straightforward case of classicism in subject, style and significance, Hercules was a popular but complicated symbol not only for regimes or princes seeking to assert their authority but also for Renaissance humanists, artists and viewers.16
Using Hercules as his exemplar of ‘robust and bold’ masculinity, the sculptor and architect Filarete noted around 1464 that ‘it would not be a suitable figure nor appropriate to him if he did not seem to be undergoing great struggles when hehelduptheskytohelpAtlasorwhenheheldAntaeusonhischest.’17 Struggle and strain are at the demigod’s mythic core. Even the images of him standing imply reward after foregoing action; he is only heroic because of those earlier labours. Performing a series of labours, usually numbered twelve, and other heroic deeds, Hercules must overcome evil and thereby expiate his own wrongs, for his heroics stem from remorse and punishment after he had murdered his first spouse and children. His heroic status is shown being fought for constantly, against a series of animal and bestial opponents, chiefly the multi-headed Hydra, the Nemean lion or the Libyan monster Antaeus.18 While demonization of his enemies guaranteed resolution in favour of male power, patriarchal authority, masculine reason and human virtue, the visual imagery frequently showed him as though forever caught in the act of struggling for that closure.
Boccaccio’s telling of the tale of Hercules’s infatuation with Omphale/Iole in his Famous Women warned that Hercules’s enslavement meant that men must be on constant guard against feminine wiles: ‘we must be vigilant and defend our hearts with great constancy . . . Passion has to be restrained with continual effort’.19 Just such assiduous labour is what Hercules usually exercises, exemplifying the notion that masculinity continually has to come into being through crisis and challenge. Physical struggle is joined with psychic demands too, for he was a troubled char- acter. Salutati’s treatise on Hercules was partly written (from the early 1380 s until his death in 1406) to answer a concern about the demigod’s representation in Seneca’sHerculesfurensasamurdererofhiswifeandoffspring.20 Salutatiresorted to an allegorical and etymological explanation for the complex fable, using it as a case study in Christian poetics. But the dark side of this mythic man was not eradicated. There were many Herculeses to deal with: Boccaccio catalogued thirty- one labours, and Salutati similarly analysed thirty-one labours, as well as finding in the literature forty-three strong men with the name Hercules.21 According to Salutati, the exemplar had provided the lesson that ‘we can make the arduous ascent of the virtues, if we do not concede but fight.’22
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 635

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 HERCULES AND HOMOEROTICS
According to the opening of pseudo-Lucian’s Erotes, which treated both same-sex and cross-sex desire, Hercules was renowned for his libidinous bent.23 Fifteenth- century humanists explicitly spoke of Hercules being smitten with another man. Panormita’s self-consciously obscene Hermaphroditus, dedicated to Cosimo de’ Medici in 1425, noted that Hercules screwed Hylas on his father’s grave.24 Controversy sparked by this adventurous Latin poetry disseminated the graphic picture of Hercules the sodomizer. Poliziano’s poetic play Orfeo, first staged in Mantua in 1480, had its chief protagonist Orpheus repudiate women and praise male-only love because the gods practise it. Like his father Jupiter succumbing to Ganymede’s charms, Hercules, too, was brought down by same-sex desire: ‘To this sacred love did Hercules concede,/He who felled monsters [or conquered the world] till he fell to the beauty of Hylas’.25 Here the Florentine scholar of Greek (whose own Greek poetry is sometimes explicitly homoerotic) recalls Theocritus’s third-century BCE pastoral lament for the beautiful, golden-haired youth Hylas, lost from the sailing crew of Hercules and the Argonauts when water nymphs embracedhimforever.26 HerculeshuntedHylasinafrenzy,longingfortheyouth, and making of himself not only an impassioned lover and true friend but also, in Theocritus’s view, a temporary deserter. Once more, the masculine hero is flawed, not by his desire per se but for the consequences, which lead him to neglect his manly duties. Hercules’s reputation during the Renaissance clearly included homoerotic traces. For example, two epigrams penned by Jacopo Sannazaro in the early 1480s, but not printed for centuries thereafter, imagined jealousy on the part of Hercules’s wife, or by Jupiter, in response to the hero’s erotic relations with Hylas.27
Such tales were in the minds of many viewers, old and young. The matters of age and change over a life cycle need to be considered in relation to eroticized power relations in the Renaissance. Older men, including teachers and masters, were same-sex lovers in a Renaissance economy of desire where ‘beardless’ youths with lesser power were objects of homoerotic attraction. Michael Rocke’s meti- culous study of official records regarding sodomy in Renaissance Florence concludes that ‘men seldom had sexual relations either with very young boys or with youths past the age of twenty’; most ‘passives’ were fanciulli in Italian, puereri in Latin, boys ‘between the ages of twelve and eighteen to twenty’, though a few were much older.28 If one factors into Rocke’s calculations, the knowledge that during the Renaissance facial hair often did not mark the advent of early maturity until the man was aged twenty-three or so, then the ranks of fanciulli also included men a little older in age. If older men continued with sodomy, they usually became ‘active’ or dominant partners and their average age was between twenty-seven and thirty-four. The erotic pattern of age-graded marriages applied to same-sex relations between men too, for ‘an average gap of eleven to nineteen years separated the senior and junior partners.’ A man’s seniority according to age was an important factor in his degree of eroticized power over either male or female sex partners.
Age is a factor in Hercules’s narrative, from his struggle against serpents as an infant, to his Choice when a young adult, to his Labours and servitude to Omphale, when he is usually shown as a bearded, full adult. The responses of viewers, male and female and varying in age, could differ according to such
636 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 matters as the depicted age. Young princes, for instance, were often shown the Choice because the virile young Hercules was an exemplar, and the demigod was thereby established as an adorable icon, one that could easily arouse homoerotic attraction.29 Older viewers need not have forgotten such sensual appeal either. The very eroticism of Hercules’s admirable body through most of his life was probably one of the key reasons for its continual depiction, suitable for such audiences as potential brides, youths needing exemplars, or older men satisfied by the civic, active and virile model. To date, art-historical attention to homoerotic imagery of the Renaissance, if present at all, has had a propensity to concentrate on the feminized or androgynous youth, like Donatello’s David or Michelangelo’s Ganymede.30 Patterns of sexual behaviour partly support such a focus, yet the erotic range is narrowed, and images with crossover rather than exclusive appeal tend to be neglected. While Antonio del Pollaiuolo’s jaunty young Hercules in the Frick Collection might be acknowledged as having an ephebic, homoerotic allure, the older, bearded, heavily built and even more assertive Hercules in Berlin, attributed to the same artist, has largely been excluded from discourses of desire.31 But the subjectivity and amorous initiative of youths, and female viewers, cannot be denied; nor can the erotic nostalgia and ongoing desire of older men, some of whom loved adult men of varying ages.
The sensual appeal of the lithe youth was accompanied by an erotic charge in representations of the older, burly and ever-active hero. The very exaggeration of his masculinity, visualized in physical sturdiness as well as eternal, reiterated labour, presented a contrast with ideal ephebes or mortal men. Set apart and overly macho, Hercules enacted maleness in an amplified register. As Richard Dyer has pointed out, macho exaggeration requires ‘the conscious deployment of signs of masculinity’ and in that sense is close to camp and drag.32 The figure of Hercules reminds viewers that macho gender is a self-conscious performance rather than a universal, natural condition, and that male gender need not be always conflated with conventional sexuality. This study, then, aims to expand the scope of what kind of masculine figure carried homoerotic potential in the corpus of Renaissance art. It also works against any presumption that objects of homo- erotic desire must be pubescent or pre-phallic or effeminate, as though only ‘lack’ can render a body attractive to an adult male. Nor can the agency of younger viewers be ignored. In particular, imagery of Hercules in close physical contact with Antaeus often conveyed an erotic subtext about both characters, one that was especially, but not exclusively, arousing for male viewers.
HERCULES AND ANTAEUS IN FLORENCE
When performing his taxing labours on earth, Hercules encountered the Libyan giant Antaeus. Especially in this feat, according to Florentine humanists like Salutati, Cristoforo Landino and Marsilio Ficino, libidinous allurements and sexual wiles are conquered.33 Such scholars were adopting the mythographic tradition articulated by Fulgentius in the sixth century, allegorizing Hercules as the opponent of Antaeus’s personification of lust. Yet that literally crushing victory is achieved against, and intertwined with, another humanized, embraced body, the only one in his various exploits, besides the giant Cacus, to feature a male opponent in human form. The physical conquest of sexual desire is visually presented in terms of sensual, somatic engagement. The physical contact evident
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 637

2 Nanni di Banco (attrib.), Hercules, c. 1395. Marble, dimensions. Florence: outer door jamb of Porta della Mandorla, Cathedral. Photo: Conway Library, Courtauld Institute of Art.
in two dimensions is tangibly accentuated in thecaseofnumerousbronzestatuettes.34 The visualization of this seeming repression of sensual appetites could actually be a carnal scene.
The narratives, and textual glosses, engage in gendered, sexual politics, and the backdrop of a masculinized patria is central to Hercules’s prominence in Florence. Already when he appeared on the civic seal in the late thirteenth century, inscribed ‘Florence subdues depravity with a Herculean club’, he enacted masculine domination and suppres- sion.35 As rendered in the emerald version of 1532 for the administration of the new, first Duke of Florence Alessandro de’ Medici, the seal showed Hercules, club over his shoulder and lion skin held in his left hand, striding to the left, ever alert.36 For the Cathedral’s bell tower, Andrea Pisano carved a relief of Hercules and Cacus around 1335, celebrating, as did Dante Alighieri’s Inferno, the determined eradication of monsters and enactment of justice against a thief.37 What seems to have been a painting of the standing Hercules was installed in the city’s town hall sometime between 1385 and 1414, with a marble titulus emphasizing its political message. Like ‘Flor- ence, the image of virtue just like myself’, the hero boasts, he has ‘brought down ungrateful cities and overcome cruel tyrants.’38 Hercu- les’s civic significance as an exemplar of conquest and masculine virtue was further highlighted, but in the register of interpretatio Christiana, when he appeared as a standing hero or enacting three of his conquests, carved on the jamb of the Porta della Mandorla of the Florentine Cathedral in the 1390s (plates 2 and 3).39 As Panofsky and Leopold Ettlinger have argued, these religious citations of Hercules present his labours
HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  as exempla virtutis, as ‘mythological antetypes in a Christian context’ of moral allegory.40
Men of the ruling class similarly cast the civis in a virile, Herculean light. The poet Franco Sacchetti, at some time after April 1377, praised Florence as the ‘Hercole novo’ waging its valiant labours against a range of enemies; Rinaldo degli Albizzi took a more personal approach around 1424–26, urging each citizen to be ‘un nuovo Ercole’ defeating the Visconti tyrants.41 Sacchetti, however, still
638 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  adhered to the more traditional picture of Florence as a female personification, there- fore easily switching from ‘Hercole novo’ in one line to ‘quest’alta Donna’, this esteemed Lady ‘Fiorenza mia’ in the following lines. In the final stanza, the city in the form of ‘New Hercules, joyous liberty/daughter of Rome and above every other woman’ is praised for its fortitude and control.42 More commonly, affiliation with ancient history made Flor- entines sons of Rome, defending a fatherland (patria) which was sometimes given rhetorical form as a female allegory, to be protected by masculinized citizens. The allegorical process could make Hercules labile. In the imagery of men like Rinaldo degli Albizzi, the classical revival of the early fifteenth century is about refreshing the rhetoric and imagery of a pagan hero already Christianized during the Middle Ages, placing the masculine paragon in a self-consciously novel civic context of propaganda and personal exemplarity. Hercules, like Florence, is resurgent, bolstered by its remaking through mythic history.
Writing a treatise on Hercules around the time of these civic/religious images, the Flor- entine Chancellor Salutati (d. 1406) envisaged Hercules as the perfect embodiment of virtue and reason; in contrast, Antaeus was a symbol for every generic vice but especially, on etymological grounds, for the libido, because Antaeus came from Libya. As is shown by Guidoccio Cozzarelli’s black Libyan Sibyl, designed in the 1480s for the pavement of Siena’s Cathedral, Libya generally connoted Africa at the time.43 With a tinge of racial superiority spicing Salutati’s negative image of the African foe, Antaeus is said to have ‘died from lack of nourishment’, because he was separated from ‘food and drink from whence lust is fed’.44 Antaeus is crushed by the strength of Hercules once he is weakened when lifted from the earth and thence deprived of nurturing contact with his mother the earth goddess Gaia. Such was Ovid’s emphasis, observing that the crux of the matter was the hero’s success in depriving the threatening giant of alimenta parentis, or
3 Detail of Piero di Giovanni Tedesco (attrib.), Labours of Hercules, c. 1395– 1400. Marble, dimensions. Florence: left inner door jamb of Porta della Mandorla, Cathedral. Photo: Conway Library, Courtauld Institute of Art.
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008
639

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 ‘his mother’s nourishment’ (Metamorphoses 9.184). Later writers continued to stresshisfemininedependency,makingthegiantinfantileandweak.45 Hercules, by contrast, uses both brawn and brain, discovering his foe’s weakness and exploiting it so that he is victorious over one who relies too much on the maternal bond.
Salutati provides a vivid description of explicitly effeminate Antaeus’s death throes, with his vision dimming, sinews loosening, guts wounded, motion stilled andsemenspilled.46 Giganticbutlegless,renderedliterallybaselessandmorally base, Antaeus in the Cathedral relief (see plate 3) is gasping, locked in the choke- hold of death by a Hercules whose face, hair and body type are not dissimilar. Ettlinger argued that the front-to-front arrangement institutes a Florentine formula, but in the first century C.E. Lucan’s epic description of the battle had Hercules meeting his foe ‘chest to chest’.47 Whatever the longevity of the visual composition, the Florentine relief has the city’s emblem caught in a mirror-like confrontation with an alter ego. Defender of the fatherland conquers a mother’s boy; inferior size beats monstrous magnitude; superior virtue defeats bestial aggression; and an interior battle eventually conquers one’s lesser self.
Prominent in location but diminutive in scale, the relief did not spur a rash of other Florentine versions, and the republican fervour of Herculean imagery seems to have dimmed. It is only in the mid-century that the deed is revived in that city, and then for a domestic, secular market. The impetus was probably the decoration around 1460 of the Sala Grande of the new Medici palace with three large paintings by the Pollaiuolo brothers, on cloth, each with gold frames, depicting Hercules battling with the Hydra, the Nemean Lion, and Antaeus.48 Choosing the same three exploits featured on the Porta della Mandorla, the Medici cycle was doubtless a component of their clever appropriation of Flor- entine civic rhetoric.49 On the other hand, public commissions of Herculean imagery ended well before Cosimo de’ Medici returned to Florence in 1434; the imagery was as much Florentine as republican, kept alive amongst the populace by children making gigantic snowmen of Hercules. Sixteenth-century interest by the first two Medici dukes in the rhetoric of Hercules, especially his exploit with Antaeus, remodelled the Florentine, political hero in a personal and classicizing vein, appropriating patriotic and virile connotations to support the legitimacy, virtue and masculine strength of their centralizing authority.50
The now-lost works by Antonio and Piero Pollaiuolo are probably remembered in two miniature oil paintings by Antonio, which may date from as late as a decade or so after his large-scale productions, and may have adorned a desk or formed a precious diptych (plate 4).51 Various images, including two engravings by Cristofano Robetta at the end of the century, are also related to the influential Medici cycle.52 The palace inventory of 1492 described one of Pollaiuolo’s canvases showing ‘Hercules bursting (scoppia) Antaeus’, a telling word because the explosive force of his crushing embrace is vividly captured even in the smaller version.53 Toes curl and clutch, nipples stand erect, and breath bursts from Antaeus’s collapsed lungs in orgasmic expiry. Hercules grips Antaeus’s buttocks and the foes link arms in a circular dance of death. Action pivots around the fulcrum at Antaeus’s genitals which are pressed against Hercules. The immense struggle is so great that Hercules is as bestial as his partner, with a deformed body, exaggerated spinal arch, popping eyes and gnashing teeth.
640 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  4 Antonio del Pollaiuolo, Hercules and Antaeus, c. 1475. Oil on panel, 16  9 cm. Florence: Galleria degli Uffizi (Inv. 1890, no. 1478). Photo: Scala/Art Resource, NY.
In the later 1470s, Pollaiuolo also produced – perhaps for the Medici palace – a bronze statuette of the combat between Hercules and Antaeus, which sets up a paragone, or comparison, between two works by the same artist in different media, exploring much of the same extravagant composition, now daringly realized in three dimensions (plate 5).54 It follows the pattern of counterpoised strain between two figures facing each other and turning around a pressure point at Hercules’s chest. For the Libyan giant, long understood to personify lust, the physical juncture with his enemy occurs at his genital site. Around this join, Pollaiuolo realizes the narrative’s intrinsic movement and extension through space in a sequence of views from multiple angles. Exploiting the tensile strength of bronze, the sculptor can also display his anatomical knowledge and skill at presenting bodies in a variety of complex yet balanced postures, just as Leonardo daVincirecommended.55 Thrashinglimbs,tensedmuscles,archedbacks,atleast
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 641

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  5 Antonio del Pollaiuolo, Hercules and Antaeus, c. 1475–80. Bronze, Height (including base) 46 cm (figures 36 cm). Florence: Museo Nazionale del Bargello (Inv. Bronzi 280). Photo: Scala/Art Resource, NY.
642 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 partially naked buttocks and Antaeus’s anguished neck and face thrown back in desperate struggle: all set the life-and-death conflict at a high pitch of affect and significance. The polished metal suggests the sweating sheen of the struggling bodies; protuberances such as muscles and rump gleam in the rich light cast on the dark bronze by natural light or by oil lamps and candles. When Antaeus’s back is being observed, the viewer sees from this range of angles each man’s genitals in a degree of alignment, with the divide of Antaeus’s taut buttocks (barely hidden by his raised foot) above Hercules’s genitals, which are enhanced by his suppo- sedly modest lion skin.56 (That the lion’s face replaces Hercules’s buttocks at another angle establishes a witty, self-conscious relationship between the artist and his audience in a further scatological joke).
As with the sometime close similarity between Virtue and Voluptas at the crossroads, or the resemblance between those same forces personified as Hercules and Antaeus on the Porta della Mandorla (see plate 3), here resemblances between the physique, hair and faces of the wrestling pair allows no easy dichotomization. Hence, clarification of masculine virtue is not predetermined. Such visual mirroring echoes Lucan’s emphasis in his epic poem on the elongated struggle between the two men which, he comments, is caused by their parity. The two strong men were amazed to have met their match (4.620). ‘They clashed as equals, one with the strength of Earth, the other with his own’ (4.636–37), a line quoted by Salutati (3.27.6–7), and only Hercules’s realization about the maternal source of his foe’s strength tips the scales in favour of the wiser demigod. Like acrobats performing the ‘Labores Herculis’ in equipoise, or two bodies pivoting around the central fulcrum noted by Leonardo da Vinci, in some pictorial choices ideal masculinity is represented in suspension, forever asserting itself but in a struggle, the outcome assured yet not shown. Viewers learn that proper masculinity must always rise to each challenge; without such tests, masculinity does not seem to be proven. The psychoanalytic model of psychic anxiety at the core of male identity is current in many studies of early modern masculinity, but the mythological model of Herculean labours suggests, rather, that under patriarchy masculinity must be constructed as always in crisis, forever under threat, in order for manliness to come to the fore.57
Meanwhile, the face-to-face personalized conflict had been represented outside Florence, in the context of an extended cycle of famous men. The lost frescoes decorating Cardinal Giordano Orsini’s Roman palace were executed before 1432 by an artist in Masolino da Panicale’s circle and survive in partial copies, the most complete being Leonardo da Besozzo’s so-called Crespi Cronica, dated to the 1430s or early 1440s.58 The immolation of Hercules occurs, and the one exploit of the hero selected for visual representation showed him clutching Antaeus’s genital region to his chest while the two engaged in a death ballet of arched spines and spread legs.
The inclusion of these two scenes, but with a different composition for the labour, recurs in a later world chronicle produced in Florence during the 1460s or early to mid-1470s, after the Medicean revival sparked renewed awareness of the exemplaryexploits(plate6).59 ByrefusingthecivicandMediceanprecedentofa face-to-face encounter, the composition in the ‘Florentine Picture Chronicle’ is unusual; by foregrounding pictorial homoerotics it is even more striking. Attributed to Baccio Baldini, Maso Finiguerra, or artists in their circle, the
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 643

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  6 Circle of Baccio Baldini or Maso Finiguerra, Hercules and Anteaus, c. 1470–75. Pen and brown ink and brown wash over black chalk, 32.6  22.6 cm. London: British Museum (1889,0527.33). Photo: Trustees of the British Museum.
drawings in the album often compile scenes by using figural elements selected from pattern books, yet the defeat of Antaeus is depicted in what seems to be an unique manner.60 Hercules is placed behind his opponent but in a more equal embrace, resulting in heads and knees being on roughly the same level.61
The entwined, sodomitical couple, of a beardless youth and a fully bearded, mature adult, seems to share the same torso and the same genitals. Antaeus’s
644 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 genitals hang between Hercules’s legs as though the bodies have merged at the physical source of lust. Hercules now battles his own ‘generic vice’ within himself but the self-reflexivity of the action also brings into pictorial form a case of physical and sexual union. The setting is informed by the textual traditions regarding geography, for the Libyan Sibyl frames the double-page spread on the left and on the far right the wrestling couple emerge from the lair of Antaeus’s cave, within a tall crag mentioned in Lucan’s Civil War (4.601) and signifying Antaeus’s removal from his mother Earth. His expulsion from his mother’s womb- like enclosure brings Antaeus to the point of death rather than birth, and one desperately appealing hand directs the eye towards a bare, lopped tree trunk that contrasts with the flourishing tree behind him. Weakened by the cutting of an umbilical tie yet idealistically ephebic, gripped in the throes of death and desire, Antaeus suffers the orgasmic ‘death’ of passion.
Hercules is more in control, his feet on the ground and his mouth muffled in his partner’s hair, rendering invisible facial expressiveness as well as genital arousal. Masculinized against the uncontrolled, gesticulating, passionately material Antaeus, Hercules is nevertheless engaged in a duet of sexual fury even as he kills the bestial enemy. He is shown as what was called the ‘active’ (agens) partner in sodomy while the implicitly penetrated Antaeus is the ‘passive’ (patiens) and womanly one, who legally was usually given a lesser punishment since he was deemed to be young and innocent.62 But the properly masculine, honourable initiative enacted by Hercules against his partner is heroic in terms of the myth. Juridical codes clash with cultural ones in this unusual Florentine imagining of sodomy performed in company with heroic murder. Battling his own passions and engaging in a death struggle with the externalized personification of sexual vice, Hercules is simultaneously implicated in the physical embodiment of those passions. He is masculine and victorious – both sodomitically and virtuously – while Antaeus is a ‘passive’, attractive and explicit object of homoerotic desire.
LANDINO AND FICINO ON THE LABOUR AGAINST ANTAEUS
Knowing the story’s moral and the inevitable death of the Libyan giant cannot deflect a viewer from recognizing the pictorial thrust. Attempts by Landino and Ficino in the next two decades to evacuate any sexual innuendo in Hercules’s actions sound awkward and ineffectual when set against this visual precedent.
When dedicating his treatise on nobility to Lorenzo de’ Medici in the late 1480s, the Florentine humanist Landino gave a political and mildly Neoplatonic gloss to the now-popular story. In rather standard mythographic terms, the tale was considered an allegory of earthly desires and material attachments overcome byaconsiderationofhigher,spiritualconcerns.63 ButLandino’sframeattendsto civic ideals. Hercules is introduced as ‘the most invincible leader of all mortals, whosurelymustbeimitated’.64 Suchapoliticalexemplarcannotbeconceivedin complex terms, and Landino emphatically confirmed the conventional allegorical interpretation of Antaeus’s defeat. Standing for the ‘irrational appetite [which] is always opposed to reason’, Antaeus was a sign of the ‘desire [for] earthly and perishable things’ overcome only ‘if our minds are lifted up on high to divine things and seized by the love of those things’ so that ‘all desire [libido] for earthly things completely perishes.’65 A psychomachia, or internal struggle in the soul
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 645

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 against vice, attains moral victory when set in a nostalgic, mythic time of perfect masculinity. The dependence of masculine identity on a dichotomized opponent is homo-socialized in that the enemy is male, but cross-sexualized in that the vice is feminized, inferior and ultimately dominated. Self-control and wisdom earn immortality, that is, ‘the highest and truest nobility’ is attained only ‘by way of all the civic and heroic virtues’.66
In his earlier Disputationes Camaldulenses (1472), Landino emphasized civic virtue even more, having his former pupil Lorenzo de’ Medici speak as a prota- gonist, who advocates the vita activa over the contemplative life. Lorenzo praises Hercules as a paragon of the active life. His wisdom ‘served all men. For . . . he destroyed horrendous wild beasts, vanquished pernicious and savage monsters, chastised the most cruel tyrants, restored justice and liberty to many peoples and nations.’67 Probably remembering the three deeds pictured in epic proportions within the Medici Palace (the beastly Lion, monstrous Hydra and tyrannical Antaeus, respectively), Landino credits to the youth, now in his early twenties, ideas that the teacher may well have first rehearsed before those very paintings. When aged around eleven, along with his younger brother Giuliano, the boy Lorenzo would have been especially thrilled by the newly installed, over-life-size paintings. Lessons learned in that manner, and reiterated in political discourse, were to last a lifetime. In the Medici circle, but continuing earlier Florentine republican rhetoric, Hercules is represented as an exemplar of the active life and of civic leadership. Lorenzo, like most Florentines, equally knew that the realities of political manoeuvring and moral conduct were far more fraught with ambi- guity and compromise.
Another teacher in the Medici circle, the Neoplatonist scholar Marsilio Ficino, took a more metaphysical stance when he wrote in a letter of 1 July 1477 that ‘reason within us is called Hercules: he destroys Antaeus, that is the monstrous images of fantasy, when he lifts Antaeus up from the earth, that is, when he removes himself from the senses and physical images.’ The other two labours popular in Florentine and Medicean imagery were read similarly by Ficino: Hercules ‘also subdues the lion, meaning that he curbs passion. He cuts down the Hydra . . . that is, he cuts off the force of desire . . . ’68 In a sense, all Hercules’s opponents were feminized by their vulnerability and ultimate weakness. But the Hydra comes closest to visual signification as female, when the multi-headed monster can be represented like the Gorgon, with snakes sprouting behind a woman’s hair, as it is in a bronze roundel by Antico.69
Commenting on fortune in a letter to Bernardo Bembo, Ficino tellingly contrasted Hercules with the effeminate, sensual and luxurious Sardanapalus, by legend the last King of Assyria: ‘I would prefer to be Hercules rather than Sardanapalus. The one overcame as many monsters as overwhelmed the other; Hercules, having vanquished savage beasts, rose up as a god, while Sardanapalus was destroyed by beasts and made lower and more wretched than they.’70 An irrational attention to worldly and less consequential matters is cast as a femi- ninized distraction, just as Aristotelians typed matter as feminine against more important, masculine substance.71 Antaeus is then implicitly a ‘passive’ partner to the man who is an adult, independent, rational hero. Mere Aristotelian matter is subsumed when manly strength and masculine reason conquer the personifi- cation of flesh. Hercules’s overpowering of monstrous illusions and lust would
646 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 seem to make him asexual, yet the Neoplatonic stress on spiritual love, propounded by men like Ficino, could open the way for the justification of Hercules as a practitioner of virtuous, pure sensuality on a higher plane. The struggle between Hercules and Antaeus becomes a psychomachia between lust and virtue, fantasy and reason, feminine and masculine principles, earthly lust and divine love.
In the philosophically gendered system of men like Ficino, the rational epitome of ideal masculinity, wielding his phallic club, is opposed to multiple, voracious monsters that embody passion, desire and fantasy. As we have seen, Filarete noted that ‘it would not be . . . appropriate to him if he did not seem to be undergoing great struggles’; Salutati’s etymology claimed for Hercules’s name the senseofbeing‘gloriousinstrife’.72 ToFicino,thevirtuousdecisionagainstVenus at the crossroads thereafter committed Hercules to a life in which he was ‘vexed perpetuallywiththeworkoflabours’.73 Hisworryinglaboursshowhimalwaysat the work of gender, for he is forever in the process of attaining masculine identity, in a series of interdependent oppositions with feminized, inferior foes. Although Herculean efforts were sometimes read in Neoplatonic terms, Landino clearly considered the civic aspect, and the gendered component indicates that philo- sophical abstraction was complemented by the power of embodiment.
MANTUA AND NORTHERN ITALY
While Landino and Ficino were writing in Florence, Andrea Mantegna and other North Italian artists were beginning to saturate the market with images of Hercules and Antaeus that visualized close, sensual contact between naked men. The Mantuan performance of Poliziano’s Orfeo in 1480 seems to have struck a particular chord. Six of Hercules’s exploits were already frescoed around 1465 by Mantegna on the Camera picta’s ceiling in the ducal palace of Mantua, perhaps because decades earlier, when still a boy, Marquis Lodovico Gonzaga had been nicknamedErcolebyhistutorVittorinodaFeltre.74 ItwasintheMantuancircleof Mantegna and his followers that production of images of Hercules with Antaeus began during the last quarter or so of the fifteenth century, spreading as far as France by the early sixteenth century. Also in Mantua, Antico’s bronze statuettes of Hercules and Antaeus (for Bishop Lodovico Gonzaga c. 1500 and for Isabella d’Este in 1519) reconstruct and complete the model of an antique marble torso.75
Mantegna referred to the damaged classical prototype – or a similar record preserved in a medal – of Hercules lifting Antaeus from behind, adapting the pose for a spandrel in the Camera picta. Some time later, he or his workshop and followers produced several versions in prints and drawings, primarily depicting the struggle either face to face or with Antaeus half-turned, which enabled more decorous masking of the genital regions (see plate 7).76 The Mantuan court’s interest in Herculean feats was further fostered upon the marriage of Marquis Francesco and Isabella d’Este in 1490. Daughter of Ercole d’Este, whose name both signalled and increased cultural interest in Hercules at the court of Ferrara, she went on to name her own son after the paternal namesake. Antico’s figure, a poignantly classical hero of virtuous conquest, might have been of special interest to Isabella’s fourteen-year-old son Ercole Gonzaga (born 23 November 1505) when newly made, and again in later years when he returned to the exemplar. Due to their episodic, heroic nature, Hercules’s deeds were readily assimilated into an
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 647

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
   7 (left) Giovanni Antonio da Brescia, Hercules and Antaeus, 1507 or later. Engraving, 23.2  17.2 cm. London: British Museum (1845,0825.703). Photo: Trustees of the British Museum.
8 (right) School of Andrea Mantegna, Hercules and Antaeus, 1470–1500. Engraving, 30.3  20.9 cm. London: British Museum (V,1.61). Photo: Trustees of the British Museum.
ongoing interest in chivalric tales, one catered to by the production of such stories for schoolboys as well as older readers.77
Soon the popularity of Mantegna’s prints engendered numerous copies, variants, revisions and reissues, spreading beyond Mantua to engage artists like Giovanni Antonio da Brescia, Nicoletto da Modena, Moderno and Luca Signorelli, as well as men in the Raphaelesque circle, including Marcantonio Raimondi (plates7and8).78 Thesheernumberofsurvivingprints(aswellastheoccasional drawing or plaquette) suggests that the wrestling match was a top seller, some- times serving not only as a didactic or inspirational gift but also as a love token to boys and young men. In all the examples from the later part of the fifteenth century and the early sixteenth century, in various media and a range of scale, the narrative of Hercules and Antaeus provided an opportunity for the repre- sentation of two naked and muscular male bodies in physical, intimate contact. In some examples, like Antico’s bronze statuette, the genitals are visible but not in any special or close relationship. At other times, a more modest viewership is assumed and genitals are largely hidden (see plate 7). In either case, there is an air of strained physical action which displays culturally approved concepts of masculine vigour, heroic conquest and close bodily encounter.
In other cases, overt genital contact is represented.79 Mantegna’s fresco almost covers Hercules’s genitals behind the back of Antaeus’s lower thigh and
648 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 hence a viewer could fantasize that Antaeus was expiring in a sexual embrace. As in the ‘Florentine Picture Chronicle’ (see plate 6), the strategy of placing one naked male body behind another’s rear, with genital closeness intimated, tended to connote sodomitical relations of the kind regularly practised in cities like Florence. Perhaps to avoid such erotic suggestiveness, some images raise Antaeus even higher above Hercules’s head, as did Antico’s statuette. One strand of prints derived from Mantegna’s design, dated c. 1490, turns Antaeus around so that his face is hidden from the viewer (see plate 8). Neither his suffering nor any hint of sexual expiration can therefore be indicated by facial expression, but the physical contact is still intense. His chest, with one breast and sensitive nipple visible, is squeezed against Hercules’s brow, his toes are clenched, the genitals rub against the hero’s chest, Antaeus’s legs are spread to show his testicles, and the admirably compact buttocks are highlighted.
Often inscribed ‘Divo Herculi invicto’ (‘to the godlike and invincible Hercules’), the prints grant divine status to Hercules overcoming lust in a representation repletewithgenitalcontactandsensualbodilydisplay.80 Nowonderthedemigod served rulers and warriors as a fictive ancestor as well as role model. However, even the contemporary biographer of the Commander of Venetian forces, Barto- lomeo Colleoni, was sceptical in the early 1470 s about that soldier’s genealogical claims to Herculean descent. His ancestral allegations had been implied on the reverse of a medal issued around 1457–58 that seemed to depict Hercules Invictus.81 More scathing was Pietro Aretino’s reference in 1534 to the man, whose last testament had resulted in a grandiose equestrian monument designed and cast in bronze by Andrea del Verrocchio, eventually unveiled in a prominent Venetian square in March 1496. Tavern quips about the vain, fame-seeking mercenary seem to be remembered in Aretino’s ‘father General’ pretentiously dressed up and strutting around a nunnery-turned-brothel, likened to the military general called ‘Bortolameo Coglioni’.82 More than once, Aretino played on the general’s name, turning Colleoni into the like-sounding coglioni (testicles), a satire invited by the coat of arms that indeed displayed testicles.83 Aretino’s implication was that, rather than ‘ballsy’ the man was ‘full of bollocks’ (coglio- neria). Militaristic heroics, then, were not always treated with unmitigated awe, and the sight of testicles, visibly hanging from Verrocchio’s steed or notable in the battle between Hercules and Antaeus, could signify proper virility, excessive cockiness or erotic sensitivity.
MICHELANGELO AND PSYCHOMACHIA
Early in the sixteenth century Michelangelo Buonarroti’s graphic explorations of the theme of Hercules and Antaeus typically sought to invest the exploit with new visual dynamism and also suggested his own engagement with the sensual exci- tements and challenges of the myth. Having assuaged his sorrow over Lorenzo de’ Medici’s death in 1492 by carving a marble Hercules, it is possible that, as James Saslow claims, ‘Michelangelo understood the ancient hero as a symbol of strong male–male affinity’ and friendship.84 The snowman that Michelangelo is reported to have made in the courtyard of the Medici palace in January 1494 may also have been a Hercules, like those built regularly by Florentine children whose winter play populated the city with civic emblems, such as the lion, or a six-foot Hercules placed next to the town hall in 1409.85
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 649

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 Also outside the Palazzo Vecchio, Michelangelo was commissioned in the first decade of the sixteenth century to produce what was surely a Herculean pendant to his David, a project that ultimately resulted instead in Bandinelli’s Hercules and Cacus.86 Drawings from the mid-1520s and now in the British Museum, London and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford (plates 9 and 10), show that Michelangelo pondered the exploit with Antaeus, probably for the protracted project in the Piazza della Signoria.87 The proportions of a marble block matching his David would have made certain configurations of the wrestlers impossible to represent, and the drawings focus on an especially close meshing of bodies, compressed together by technical as well as moral implications. The two form ‘one unit of movement’, as Ursula Hoff noted, adding about the Ashmolean sketch that ‘Antaeus’ head movement expresses the pathos of pain in the manner of the Laoco ̈on.Thefiguresseemforeverinterlockedinastrugglewithoutend.’88 Onthe Oxford sheet, the rivals are face to face, but the elevated Antaeus twists away in a serpentine fury; in the London drawing, torsoes face each other, but Antaeus is wound so that his buttocks abut Hercules’s genitals, creating an even more physically intimate engagement. In each case, Michelangelo envisaged Antaeus so united with Hercules that he seems to rise up from the genital site of creation like a tormented alter ego and Hercules’s soul grapples with itself over the dilemma of physical arousal. Like the artist of the ‘Florentine Picture Chronicle’, Pollaiuolo, or Hans Baldung Grien, to name just a few, Michelangelo did not readily polarize
9 Michelangelo Buonarroti, Four grotesque heads and Hercules and Antaeus, c. 1524–25. Red chalk, 25.4  34.8 cm. London: British Museum (1859,0625.557 recto). Photo: Trustees of the British Museum.
 650 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 the two combatants, instead understanding them as ambivalent or, rather, interdependent.
Michelangelo’s poem on the verso of the Ashmolean sheet ponders the need forrepentanceandredirectionasdeathapproaches.89 Spurredtosuchthoughts by his aged reflection in a mirror, and declaring his sense that he is an ‘enemy of myself’ (nemico di me stesso) because mortal feelings such as ‘false hopes and empty desire/– weeping, loving, burning, and sighing’ have kept him ‘far away from the truth’, Michelangelo grapples with the conflict explored later on the other side of the sheet. Although he does not name the mythic protagonists, who are locked in an unresolved struggle, the poem notes that ‘Now that time is changing and sloughing off my hide,/death and my soul make constant trial together (insieme),/ the second and the first, for my final state.’ The mirrored intertwining of the two male figures echoes Michelangelo’s moving psychomachia or trial between his soul and his mortal, passionate nemico within. Faced by forthcoming death and needing to find ‘truth’ rather than sensual and earthly desires, Michelangelo’s pen and chalk, at different times, delved into the divided elements which battle insieme, as the soul struggles to overcome material, fleshly desires. His crisis of conscience is visually encoded in the embodied terms of homoerotic temptation.
A more finished red-chalk drawing, which may relate to others he presented to his favourite Tommaso de’ Cavalieri around 1530 (plate 11), returns to the same three Herculean exploits that once decorated the Medici Palace.90 Between the conquests of the Nemean Lion and the Lernean Hydra, Hercules battles with Antaeus. The foe is inverted; he curves over in a foetal position and struggles with his head close to Hercules’s genitals, as though the seat of reason is now directly
10 Michelangelo Buonarroti, Hercules and Antaeus and other sketches, recto, c. 1524–25. Red chalk with some light drawing in pen and ink, 28.8  42.7 cm. Oxford: Ashmolean Museum (1844.63) recto. Photo: Ashmolean Museum, University of Oxford.
 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 651

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  11 Michelangelo Buonarroti, Labours of Hercules, c. 1530. Red chalk, 27.2  42.2 cm. Windsor: Royal Library. Photo: The Royal Collection r 2008 Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
confronted with the source of lust.91 Lifted well away from his mother Earth, Antaeus has lost the battle and the Herculean triumph of reason might be signified by the masking of the genital area by a head, usually the seat of reason, but here it signifies the demented mind of a bestial enemy, whilst also implying the performance of oral sex. As in the earlier drawings, Antaeus has attenuated lower limbs and is enfolded in an interlocked relationship with the torso and genital region of Hercules; he seems to arise from the body of the masculine hero. Sprouting a monster from his genitals and torso, Hercules wrestles with a prodigy and gives birth to a phantasm who is an ‘enemy of myself’. Michelangelo’s conception of the theme recalls Ficino’s internalization of the battle where ‘reason within us is called Hercules’, and he vanquishes monstrous fantasies ‘when he removes himself from the senses’.
Another drawing by Michelangelo of the mid-1520s or early 1530s (plate 12), whether or not it refers specifically to Hercules, shows two nudes similarly wrestling in erotic, physical ardour. One arm reaches for his partner’s genitals; one leg is placed between two others; and the bodies twist and writhe as though trying to disappear into each other. The accompanying poem voices poignant amazement at the ‘new and strange anguish’ of love, which ‘hurts me more the more grace I receive.’92 Here the contradictions of love are played out in a passionate fury of urgent desire. Poem and drawing each present a stunned commitment to the pain and struggle as well as grace of desire. Herculean self- control and Neoplatonic distancing is willingly disavowed for the pleasure of
652 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
  12 Michelangelo Buonarroti, Two Nude Men Wrestling, mid-1520s or mid-1530s. Red chalk,
23.7  19.2 cm. Paris: Louvre (Inv 709 recto). Photo: Re ́union des muse ́es nationaux/Art Resource, NY.
losing one’s senses in love. Like the drawings of Hercules and Antaeus, this sheet tangibly imagines the close, sweating embrace of two male bodies linked almost as though arising from a single marble block. Unlike the other drawings and the Ashmolean poem, the exploration in this sketch and verse does not repress the libido but imagines homoerotic desire in less guilty, more immediate and fervent terms.
& ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008 653

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 PATHOS, ECSTASY AND SCEPTICISM
Depending on the image, and the viewer, emotive responses to Hercules and Antaeus varied. Hoff discerned a trend during the course of the fifteenth century, from Hercules’s certain victory announced by Antaeus’s passive suspension, to Pollaiuolo’s energized, violent staging, to the interest shown by Mantegna and others like Michelangelo in ‘the pathos of surrender’.93 Vasari noted of Pollaiuolo’s now-lost canvas that Antaeus was opening his mouth, gasping, and finally, slowly, giving up the ghost. Words from a partly mutilated poem found on another section of Michelangelo’s drawing in Paris evoke anguish, anger and fury, aswellasthesoulanddeath.94 Justsuchamixtureofpainandpassion,suffering and spirituality, are evoked in the pathos of Antaeus’s demise. The link with his mother’s nourishment is broken irrevocably; sensual appetites fade; death approaches. The body language and, when seen, Antaeus’s facial expression, eloquently intimate that the loss of passion and life is bitter and sorrowful. The very rationality and impassivity of Hercules, often emphasized, accentuates a melancholic loss of its opposite, which is pictured in the form of superb, young flesh at the height of physical conditioning. Admiration for the demigod’s superhuman, virtually impossible, wisdom and strength is balanced by empathy for the vanquished sensuality every mortal citizen found hard to banish utterly.
The heightened, passionate engagement of the combat has a sensual, even erotic, affect in itself. The ‘death’ of orgasm is writ large here, in a sense, for pathos mingles with ecstatic removal of self from self. In a Neoplatonic key, the spirit rises up out of the dead but elevated body of the giant; in the allegorical and mythographic sense, libido is conquered by reason; in a material and visual sense, sensuality is registered in moving pathos and anguish. After all, a long-lived figure for orgasmic release and post-coital languor was ‘death’ or the ‘little death’ suffered after libidinous battles in which one was ‘killed’, ‘finished off’ or ‘spent’.95 As was often the case, Aretino articulated what others might not dare, but thereby he recorded one way in which it was possible to interact with learned conventions on a more earthy level. Precisely that ancient exemplar of artistic pathos, the Laoco ̈on, recently unearthed in Rome in 1506, struck Aretino in several ways. The dolore of the father’s struggle against the serpent is what Aretino praised in his attempt at respectable verse, the Marfisa written in Mantua around 1527–29. No longer seeking court patronage but deciding to make money on the public stage of printed books, around five or so years later Aretino again reminded readers of the classical paragon. At the moment of orgasmic relief, General Colleoni in the orgiastic convent ‘wore that frowning look the marble statue at the Vatican Museum gives the snakes that are strangling him between his sons.’96 Of course, such bawdy irreverence is not adequate to Michelangelo’s anguish or Pollaiuolo’s violence; nevertheless, it is a reminder that in the early modern world, from Neoplatonic heights to the depths of the sensually provocative, as Pierre de Ronsard put it, ‘Love and death are but the same thing.’
Hercules was a notable test case for Renaissance attempts to reinforce patriarchy, define masculinity and contain sexualities when none were uncon- tested fields. Masculinity was dependent upon a continuous struggle over the selection of particular behaviours, roles and narratives. Multiple in roles and
654 & ASSOCIATION OF ART HISTORIANS 2008

HERCULES IN ITALIAN RENAISSANCE ART
 deeds, Hercules was, during the Renaissance, both mad and heroic, impassioned and implacable, driven and divine. Rarely can we know what Renaissance women thought of the excessively masculine Hercules. Two voices from the first half of the fifteenth century were sceptical. The female humanist Isotta Nogarola extolled the heights women could reach, citing various exploits in history, and at one point asking her male correspondent: ‘Did not the Amazons build a state without men? . . . For they were so strongly endowed with virtus [valour/virtue] and with remarkable military skill that to Hercules and Theseus it seemed impossible to bring the force of the Amazons under their rule.’97
That Hercules eventually won the girdle of the Amazonian queen Hippolyta is conveniently passed over, for Nogarola’s more important point was that women too were gifted with potent virtus, with military and political acumen. Women like Nogarola may have found especially delicious Omphale’s triumph over effeminized Hercules.
Another woman writer was cautious about the effect of the Herculean model upon young men, an audience especially targeted with images of the demigod, on birth spoons or trays, in statuettes, paintings and public entries, showing him at the crossroads or performing his labours. Christine de Pizan did not find Hercules such a great exemplar for a fifteen-year-old boy aspiring to be a knight. Her mythographic Letter of Othea to Hector (c. 1400) finds commendable Hercules’s loyal assistance to friends when rescuing Proserpina from Hades. However, ‘it is not at all necessary to you/To acquire arms and make/A journey to battle with ... serpentinethings’,asdidHercules.98 Afterscoffingatthesedeeds,theGoddessof Wisdom does approve self-defence, ‘constancy and firmness’ and a similar strength which is ‘unyielding against carnal desires’, so on the allegorical level this female writer could use Hercules as a moral but not a literal example for a boy reared on chivalric tales. Referring to the illustrations to her text, she wrote ‘Toward Hercules you ought to turn/And gaze at his worthiness.’ By such a divi- sion between ostensible narrative and moralizing justification, Hercules could be seen by women, children and philosophizing men as a proper, decorous subject.
The images themselves, however, show that Hercules’s battle against lust – personified in such figures as Omphale, Antaeus or Voluptas to one side of the Choice – was not only a subject for moralizing and political allegory but also a narrative that could excite the erotic fantasy of artists and viewers. Whether in the political context of courts or cities, Hercules during the Renaissance ostensibly performed masculine control of the passions through the exercise of rational might and moral courage, yet at the same time the visual imagination embodied the struggle in sombre, sensual and witty ways. Bronze statuettes of Hercules made for display in palace interiors can only refer obliquely to civic or grand-scale public virtue and in these objects the tactile possibilities of sensually polished bronze, which also warms to the touch, would increase any apprehension of the subject as sensual. Prints were openly shown or privately enjoyed, welcoming close and repeated inspection as one followed every somatic detail marvellously wrought in the new technology of figurative printing. Women and men saw images of Hercules in a variety of circumstances and with a range of responses. It is clear that the possible understandings of the complex figure of Hercules included high-minded asexuality, recondite moralizing, political allegory, gendered contrast, homoerotic engagement and vernacular amusement."
    },
    {
      "Column 1" : "edy5vu4jpfdrlhrm7yqsrpivs4",
      "Column 2" : "10.2307/750823",
      "Year" : "1958",
      "Sprache" : null,
      "Column 5" : "gb",
      "URL" : "https://web.archive.org/web/20150308010131/https://www3.nd.edu/~pweithma/justice_seminar/Siena/Rubenstein%20%28Political%20Ideas%20in%20Sienese%20Art%29.pdf",
      "Titel" : "Political Ideas in Sienese Art: The Frescoes by Ambrogio Lorenzetti and Taddeo di Bartolo in the Palazzo Pubblico",
      "Journal" : "Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes",
      "Column 9" : "JSTOR",
      "Text" :"When between 1337 and 1340 the government of Siena commissioned
Ambrogio Lorenzetti to adorn their council chamber in the Palazzo
Pubblico,1 the frescoing of town halls and palaces had already become fairly
widespread in Italy. Few of these early frescoes in secular buildings have sur-
vived, but the evidence we possess shows that they were frequently meant to
serve political and didactic purposes.2 Inscriptions often helped to press home
the message of the paintings. One of the most remarkable of these frescoes was
painted in 1315 by Simone Martini in the Great Council Hall of the Palazzo
Pubblico in Siena (P1. I5a). The 'Maest1'3 is more than a religious painting
of the Madonna and Child. According to the Sienese tradition, the Virgin
had been the ruler of Siena since 126o, when before the battle of Montaperti
against Florence the Sienese had put themselves in her hands ;* thus in the
'Maesta' she addresses the spectators, who are the councillors assembled in the
hall, not only as the Mother of Christ but also as the protector of Siena.
"Diligite iustitiam qui iudicatis terram,"5 we read on the scroll the Christ-
child is holding; and in the inscriptions below, the Virgin expresses her delight
in good counsel, and her contempt for selfishness, which leads citizens to
despise her and to betray her city ; 6 and she replies to the four other Sienese
patron saints interceding for the citizens at the foot of her throne, that accept-
ance of their prayers would not extend to those who oppress the weak and
betray her town. In short, the message of the 'Maesta' turns on the two
concepts of justice and of the subordination of private interest to that of the
community. These are also the two concepts underlying the programme of
the frescoes which about twenty-two years later Ambrogio Lorenzetti painted
in the adjoining council chamber of the government, the Nove. But instead
of using the direct and somewhat rudimentary approach of the 'Maestai,'
Lorenzetti couches the message of his frescoes in a complex philosophical
allegory. n interpretation of this allegory-that is, of the frescoes known as the
'Buon Governo' and 'Mal Governo"'7-should start with an attempt to under-
stand their arrangement. As we face them, with our backs to the windows,
we find on the left wall the allegory of Bad Government (P1. I5b) and its
effects on town and countryside; on the end wall in front of us, the allegory
of Good Government (P1. i5c); and on the wall on the right, its effects. The
allegory of 'Buon Governo' thus occupies the central position among the
frescoes of the Sala de' Nove.s It does so in more than one respect. It faces
the windows, so that it receives the full light; and while the allegory of Bad
Government and its effects occupy one wall only, two walls are reserved for
the allegory of Good Government and its effects. Evidently it is on this
allegory that the composition turns. Through the following attempt at inter-
pretation of the central fresco, we may hope to obtain the clue for the under-
standing of the other frescoes as well.
The so-called 'Buon Governo' fresco can be divided into three sections:
two upper sections separated-and, as we shall see, also connected-by the
figure of Pax, and one lower section, running along the whole width of the
fresco. Let us first consider the two upper sections, which form the main part
of the fresco. They represent two allegorical scenes: on the left, Justice
(Pl. I6a); on the right, a ruler with figures representing virtues (P1. I6b).
The allegorical scene on the right appears at first sight to be a pictorial
representation of a conventional "mirror of princes" motif; the contemporary
specula principum taught kings to observe the cardinal virtues-the virtutes
politicaeg-and such other "political" virtues as were considered essential for
good rulership, for instance magnanimity and liberality. In the Lorenzetti
fresco, the ruler is surrounded by the four cardinal virtues and Magnanimity,
with Peace a little apart.'1 The specula principum placed the emphasis on the
cardinal virtues; in the Lorenzetti fresco the three theological virtues appear
in a higher but less central position than the cardinal virtues, being represented
by much smaller winged figures floating round the Ruler's head, somewhat
removed from the main scene.11
However, this interpretation of the allegory, obvious as it may seem, is
handicapped by the fact that Siena was a republic. There was no monarchical
ruler in Siena; the only magistrate one might conceivably think of in this connexion, the podestd, had lost practically all his former importance and had
become a subordinate official.12 Who, then, is the Ruler in this allegorical
scene? The figure has been explained as: "an aged king,"'3 the Good
Ruler,'4 Good Government,'5 or Justice;16 others believe that it is meant
to personify the Commune of Siena.17 This is the most satisfactory explana-
tion so far; in fact, the ruler is dressed in the colours of Siena, black and
white; at his feet lies the Sienese Wolf with the Twins, and above his head
we find the initials "C.S.C.C.V." According to some,8s the initials stand
for "Comune Senarum cum civilibus virtutibus"-instead of the usual
"virtutes politicae."19 But did not the original inscription read "C.S.C.V."?
This was in fact the reading given in the eighteenth century by Della Valle,20
and, what is more important, the one which we find on the Biccherna cover
for 1344; for on this cover, which is generally attributed to Ambrogio Loren-
zetti, the figure of the "ruler" is evidently modelled on that of the fresco.21 If
this assumption is correct, the initials would clearly stand for "Commune
Senarum Civitas Virginis."22 There are contemporary iconographic examples
of personifications of Communes, such as that on the tomb of Bishop Guido
Tarlati in the Cathedral of Arezzo.23 Lorenzetti evidently solved the dilemma
of how to adapt a mirror of princes motif to a city-republic by substituting the
personified Commune for the prince.
However, if we turn to the inscription at the bottom of the fresco, we find
the explicit statement that the Ruler is meant to represent the Common
Good: Only one scholar, S. Morpurgo, seems to have noticed the significance of this
inscription for the interpretation of the allegory, and dealing with another
subject, did not attempt to inquire into its wider implications.25 To do so, we
have to turn to the left section of the fresco.
"Questa santa virtui" refers to the figure of Justice on the left (P1. I6a).
Justice is also seated on a throne and forms the centre of an elaborate allegory.
Sapientia, above her head, holds a pair of scales, on each of which there is a
winged figure, representing distributive and commutative justice (according
to the inscriptions); the former beheads one man and places a crown on the
head of another; the latter gives money to one and a weapon to another.
A double cord runs from the scales to the left hand of Concordia seated below
Justice, and from Concordia to the hands of the citizens at the bottom of the
fresco, to end in the right hand of the Ruler.
The scene represents a complex allegory in which the Aristotelian theory
of justice, in its contemporary scholastic and juristic interpretation, forms the
principal theme. At the same time, there are Augustinian overtones in the
combination of lustitia and Pax; and E. H. Kantorowicz has recently pointed
to the affinity between the allegory of Justice and the juristic notion ofjustitia
mediatrix.2" There are some iconographical similarities with the imagery of
the prologue to the Quaestiones de iuris subtilitatibus ;27 it may also be added that
the legal philosophy of the fourteenth-century Post-Glossators, however, was in
its turn influenced by the Thomistic-Aristotelian theory of law.28 Perhaps the
most obvious representation of that theory in our fresco is the distinction be-
tween distributive and commutative justice.29 Neither Aristotle nor St. Thomas include punitive jurisdiction in the former; but the Italian version
of Giles of Rome's De regimine principum modifies the Aristotelian definition in
this way ;30 while the lawyer Lucas de Penna argues that punishable crimes
are violations of either kind of justice.31 In our fresco, Sapientia is on the
same higher level as the theological virtues and is holding a book as well as
the balance of Justice, who is lightly touching each of its scales.32 That
Sapientia should inspire lustitia corresponds to the relationship of divine
and natural law with human law, which is the basic theme of St. Thomas'
"treatise on law" in the Summa Theologica and plays an important r6le in
juristic thought. "Ratio divinae sapientiae moventis omnia ad debitum finem
obtinet rationem legis"; "omnis lex humanitus posita intantum habet de
ratione legis, inquantum a lege naturae derivatur," says St. Thomas;33 while
the inspiration of Justice by Reason was a favourite notion of the civil
lawyers.34 Finally, there is the long mediaeval tradition of the pre-eminence
of Sapientia in the moral system35 and as a guiding principle of government, a
tradition which had been expanded in thirteenth-century mirrors of princes ;36
and the Wisdom of Solomon, which was one of its Biblical sources, probably
provided a further element for the formulation of the allegory.37
"Since it belongs to the law to direct to the common good," says St.
Thomas, ". .. it follows that the justice which is in this way called general is called legal justice, because thereby man is in harmony with the law which
directs the acts of all the virtues to the common good."38 That justice directs
to the common good is symbolized, in the fresco, by the cord39 connecting
Justice with the "Ruler", i.e. with the personified common good, and by the
citizens who, while holding the cord, face towards the latter.40 The cord thus
forms a link between the allegory ofJustice on the left and that of the Common
Good on the right.
It is this link and this direction towards the common good which may
provide a further clue to the significance of the "Ruler." Just as the allegory of
Justice is largely based on Aristotelian philosophy in contemporary adaptation,
so also is the concept of the common good as personified by the "Ruler." This
concept was familiar to mediaeval thought before the Aristotelian revival; but
it achieved unprecedented importance after the translation of the Politics in
about 1260,41 and, in the legal formulation of utilitas publica, played an im-
portant r61le in canonist and legist theories.42 St. Thomas' rendering of a
famous passage of the Ethics provides, as it were, the leitmotif: "bonum com-
mune . . . est melius et divinius quam bonum unius" ;43 and both his own
views and those of his followers on the state, constitutions and political obliga-
tion turn to a large extent on this notion.44 Nor was the success of the concept
of the common good limited to the schools. In the Italian city-republics, it
was hailed as being able to secure civic peace and unity without recourse to
despotism. It could thus serve as a republican alternative to the claims of the
despots and their followers that only an autocratic ruler could bring salvation
to the towns torn by factions and social struggles. At a time when more and
more Italian communes were coming under the sway of the Signoria, and
when the republican regime might well seem to be doomed in Lombardy and
Tuscany, the Aristotelian concept of the common good as the basis and
criterion of good government had a special appeal for the Italian citizens.
In the early fourteenth century, it becomes a commonplace in political and
didactic prose and poetry that only by placing common welfare above private
interest can internal peace, economic prosperity and political power be
secured and preserved; so does the view that neglect of the common good
leads to civic strife and the decline and fall of cities. We find these ideas in
"trattati di virtiu", chronicles, rhetorical manuals, sermons and theoretical
treatises.45 The most systematic exposition of the Aristotelian idea of the common good in the context of contemporary political problems can be
found in De bono communi by the Florentine Dominican preacher Remigio de'
Girolami. Remigio sets out to prove that the neglect of the common good in
favour of self-interest was the cause of much disaster in contemporary Italy.48
Salvation, then, lies in making the common good the ruling principle in the
state; in other words, the common good must be raised to the position of the
ruler.47 This, I think, is the final clue to the message of the allegory of the
Ruler.
This message derived additional strength from the fact that for Italian
citizens of the fourteenth century the term bonum commune had its peculiar
overtones; was it not identical with "the good of the Commune"? Remigio
de' Girolami, in one of his sermons, uses the terms "pro bono Communis" and
"pro communi bono" as interchangeable.48 The rule of the common good
thus merges with that of the Commune. Such terminological ambivalence
may help to explain how it was possible to represent in one and the same
figure the persona publica of the Sienese city-state and the concept of the
common good.49
The virtue which hovers above that figure, and which accordingly corre-
sponds to Sapientia above the head of Justice, is Caritas. According to the
Pauline definition, charity is the highest of the theological virtues.50 Now
Ptolemy of Lucca, in his continuation of St. Thomas' De regimine principum,
which was commonly ascribed to the latter, states that charity "in merito
antecedit omnem virtutem," and that "communia propriis, non propria
communibus anteponit."51 With this focus on its social significance, charity
is the theological virtue which bears the closest relation to the common
good, just as divine Sapientia does to Justice.52 E. H. Kantorowicz has convincingly argued that the figure of Caritas in the Lorenzetti fresco may
also refer to amor patriae, according to Ptolemy of Lucca's statement that
"amor patriae in radice charitatis fundatur."53 Our interpretation of the
figure of the "Ruler" gives this an even wider significance. For if the notion
of bonum commune can be interchangeable with that of the bonum Communis, then
it is only a step further to connect it also with amor communis or amor patriae.54
Taken in this sense, the allegory of the "Ruler" appears almost like an illus-
tration of Ptolemy's definition, which ends with these words: "Ergo amor
patriae super caeteras virtutes gradum meretur honoris. Hoc autem est
dominium." 55
The allegory ofJustice and the Common Good provides a pictorial repre-
sentation of the twin elements of Aristotelian political philosophy, which,
however, can only be understood if we bear in mind the contemporary
adaptations of Aristotelian theory as well as its political implications. The
two images are closely linked with one another, thus symbolizing the twofold
rule of Justice and the Common Good. At the same time, the links connect-
ing them are intended to show the effects of their rule, as well as to supply a
connexion with the contemporary world, which is represented, in the bottom
section of the fresco, by citizens (probably councillors and magistrates) and
soldiers. The two monumental figures of Pax and Concordia, as well as the
cord running through the latter's hand, symbolize in a general fashion the
effects of the rule of Justice and the Common Good. The soldiers and the
two feudal lords submitting to the Commune show its effects on political
power;56 the cord held by Concordia and the citizens represents its effects
on civic unity. '
In the mediaeval classifications of virtues, peace and concord were sub-
sidiary virtues, and there were doubts whether peace was a virtue at all.58
There was no traditional iconographic reason why they should have been chosen to supplement the cardinal virtues round the figure of the Ruler. But
in the political philosophy of St. Thomas and his successors, justice and the
common good are closely connected with concord and peace. "Bonum autem
et salus consociatae multitudinis est, ut eius unitas conservetur, quae dicitur
pax" ;59 and it is "per iustitiam" that "conservatur pax civitatis."60 Graziolo
Bambaglioli expresses an idea which was widely accepted in contemporary
Italy when he says of the common good that "nascene unione e dolce pace."6'
The reason for the presence of Pax and Concordia in our fresco is that they
represent, according to contemporary political thought, the most desirable
effects of just government in the interest of the common welfare, or, in St.
Thomas' words, of the ordo ad bonum commune.62 The unity "consociatae
multitudinis" is represented by the citizens. Pax is seated above them, and
forms the top of a triangle of which they are the base.
While the figures of Pax and Concordia appear to derive primarily from
Thomistic sources, they may also have been influenced by classical and
Augustinian ideas. For St. Augustine, "peace between man and man is well-
ordered concord,"63 and temporal peace and justice are the cornerstones of
the good Christian state. Pax and concordia were twin ideals of Roman political
thought, which would have been familiar to the thirteenth century through
authors like Cicero and Sallust, and it is perhaps not a mere coincidence that
the figure of Pax distinctly shows the influence of classical art.64 Another
connexion familiar to Roman antiquity was that between pax and securitas;
and it is securitas which is the key concept of the fresco on the right wall of the
Sala de' Nove, which depicts the effects of the rule of justice on town and
country. Security is represented as a woman hovering over the country-
side; she is holding a scroll telling the onlooker that the people will be safe
as long as "questa donna", i.e. justice, rules; while the long inscription at the
bottom of the fresco addresses the magistrates of Siena with the words:
"Behold the good things she [that is, justice] provides us with and how sweet
and tranquil is life in the city in which she is maintained .. ."65 In fact, the entire scene of peace and prosperity reads like an illustration of St. Thomas'
words: "per iustitiam autem conservatur pax civitatis."66
It is, accordingly, the neglect of justice and of the common good which
forms the subject of the allegory on the left wall. Tyranny sits on the throne
of justice, who lies at her feet; she is surrounded by vices which, like the
virtues of the central fresco, have a political significance and do not strictly
conform to the traditional schemes: avarice, pride, vainglory; cruelty, treason,
fraud; fury, discord and war.67 Timor, the opposite to securitas, reigns over
the desolate countryside, while the scenes at the bottom of the allegory itself
show the disastrous results of tyrannical government in the city. The horns
of tyranny, which signify its diabolical origin, are in the Biblical and mediaeval
tradition ;68 but the concept which the figure personifies appears as an adapta-
tion of Aristotelian theory to contemporary conditions in an Italian city-
state. The Aristotelian contrast between king and tyrant, distinguished by
concern for or negligence of the common good, is replaced by that between
the common good itself, or the good state, and tyranny; a contrast which was
evidently much better suited to the contemporary political realities of a
republican r6gime.69 Tyranny, in its turn, could mean despotism of one or
of many; the Signoria or collective oppression as exercised by magnates and
nobles of city-republics.70 The rule of Tyranny thus forms the negative
counterpart to that of Justice and the Common Good, and the inscriptions
press home the meaning of this allegory by providing the link with the central
fresco:
Per volere el ben proprio in questa terra
Sommess' e la Giustizia a Tyrannia ...
and, in its turn, the defeat of justice means that respect for the common good
no longer unites the citizens:
La dove sta legata la Iustitia
Nessuno al Ben Comune gia may s'acorda
Ne tira a dritta corda,
Perb convien che Tirannia sormonti ...
Thus neglect of the common good and of justice brings with it tyranny; and tyranny means "sospetto / Guerre, rapine, tradimenti e'nganni." In this way,
the allegory of Tyranny completes, in a negative fashion, that of the central
fresco.
The allegories ofJustice, the Common Good and Tyranny-for this is how
the frescoes of the Sala de' Nove should perhaps be renamed-form a unique
pictorial manifestation of communal political thought of the Trecento. One
would like to know the author of the programme of the frescoes and of the
inscriptions; but there is not enough extant evidence to identify him. Loren-
zetti seems to have had the reputation of being philosophically inclined;71
but it is more likely that some learned notary or chancellor with legal train-
ing and philosophical interests was the author-someone like Graziolo de'
Bambaglioli, chancellor of Bologna, whose Trattato delle virt~ morali, written be-
tween 1334 and 1343, shows the influence of contemporary political Aristo-
telianism.72 At any rate, the government of the Nove must have accepted
programme and inscriptions. It can be argued that the allegories bear little
relation to conditions in Siena in the first half of the fourteenth century. How-
ever, the frescoes were primarily meant to represent political ideals. The Nove
doubtless felt that their message would find general acceptance, and indeed
it conformed to a popular trend in contemporary political thought. But it
could also be read as a panegyric on the relative political stability and pros-
perity which the merchant oligarchy of the Nove had succeeded in preserving
over two generations; and the members of this oligarchy itself could regard
the frescoes as expressing a message addressed to the ruling class: that only
through unity could they hope to preserve the republican regime and their
own ascendancy. Both Lorenzetti's frescoes and Simon Martini's 'Maesta' contain civic poli-
tical philosophy. The programme of the Lorenzetti frescoes, however, is not
only much more complex-it also has a less religious, more secular character.
Lorenzetti's Iustitia, too, has the inscription: "Diligite iustitiam qui iudicatis
terram." But in Lorenzetti's fresco, it is not the Virgin who appears as the
ruler of Siena, but lustitia, together with the Common Good.73
This process of secularization is carried a step further in another set of
frescoes which, about seventy-five years later, were painted by order of the
Sienese government in the antechapel of the Palazzo Pubblico.
III
The work was entrusted to Taddeo di Bartolo, who had previously, in
1406-7, painted the chapel with scenes from the life of the Virgin,74 and who had already been commissioned, in 14o8, to paint a St. Christopher in the
antechapel.75 In 1413, the government once more turned its attention to the
antechapel and commissioned Taddeo to paint "honoratas et pulchras
figuras" on its remaining walls;76 he completed this work in 1414.77 The ante-
chapel, apart from being the vestibule to the chapel, served as a kind of cor-
ridor between the council chambers of the highest magistracies and of the
Great Council, the Consiglio della Campana: for it would be used by magis-
trates and council members who went from the Sala de' Nove (actually of the
Undici, as the government was now called) or from the Sala del Consiglio or
del Mappamondo alongside the chapel to the new Sala di Balia or to that of
the Concistoro. Perhaps this was one of the reasons why Taddeo, who had
been left a free hand in the decoration of the chapel,'78 was ordered to follow,
in the antechapel, the directives of two prominent citizens, Messer Pietro de'
Pecci and Ser Cristoforo di Andrea.79 Pecci was a doctor of law and teacher
at the Sienese studio, who repeatedly held important offices, including member-
ship of the Signoria;80 Ser Cristoforo had been chancellor of Siena with brief
interruptions since 1404.81
The programme they adopted bears some significant resemblance to that
of the Lorenzetti frescoes in the Sala de' Nove. Formally, it centres, like the
Lorenzetti frescoes, on virtues with a political meaning, although the selection
is not quite the same. In addition to three cardinal or political virtues, Justice,
Prudence and Fortitude, we again find Magnanimity (P1. I7a, b, c, d); but
Peace and Concord are missing. There are no theological virtues at all,
perhaps because they had already been incorporated into the programme of
the chapel.82 On the other hand, we find the virtue of Religio (P1. I 7e).83
Instead of the philosophical allegory of the Lorenzetti frescoes, the virtues are illustrated by Famous Men (P1. 19a) ;84 but as in the Lorenzetti frescoes, the
significance of the figures and of the programme as a whole is explained by a
large number of inscriptions.
A brief description of the frescoes may help to explain this programme.
They are arranged on two levels (Fig. I). On the upper level, the virtues are placed in lunettes, and are surrounded by an acanthus frieze with medallions
containing portraits of "uomini famosi," with two larger portraits in the span-
drels of the arches leading to the chapel, next to Fortitude and Prudence. The
arrangement of medallions in a frieze had been used in Simone Martini's
'Maesta' and in the Lorenzetti frescoes, and more recently in the acanthus of
the Porta della Mandorla of the Duomo of Florence;85 it has a long icono-
graphical tradition," but the combination of portrait medallions with virtues
is unusual, and reminds one of the reverse scheme of rulers surrounded by
virtues in medallions which was fairly common in mediaeval illuminations."8
On the other hand, the connecting of virtues with exempla bears some re-
semblance to the cycle of the liberal arts in the Spanish Chapel in Florence.88
On the lower level, full-length figures of Famous Men cover the main wall
facing the chapel and the walls inside the arches leading to the chapel and
to the Sala del Mappamondo; in the latter, they are placed under figures of
pagan gods and, in the apex of the arch, a map of Rome. The principal full-
length figures of Famous Men stand in painted porticoes. On the base of
these porticoes are tituli; one figure, to be described presently, holds an in-
scribed scroll, and there are also inscriptions under the virtues.89 One long
inscription is in the centre of the main wall and divides the Famous Men into
two groups of three each; it is in Italian, while all the other inscriptions are in
Latin.90 On the wall facing the entrance to the Sala del Mappamondo, the
St. Christopher painted six years earlier remains unconnected with the pro-
gramme of the new frescoes.
The figures on the two pillars of the arch dividing the chapel from the ante-
chapel-and thus in a special position, belonging as it were to both-are Judas Maccabeus and a Sienese patron saint, the Blessed Ambrogio Sansedoni.91
All the other Famous Men, both in the "porticoes" and in the medallions, are
Roman citizens, with one exception: the figure on the pillar of the arch lead-
ing to the Sala del Mappamondo contiguous to the main wall of the ante-
chapel. This figure, which is in its turn somewhat detached from the main
group of frescoes in the antechapel, is none other than Aristotle (P1. I8a);
and his special position at the entrance to the antechapel from the hall of the
Great Council is explained by his function: for he introduces the Famous Men
to the onlooker.92 In two inscriptions, as in Simone Martini's 'Maesta,' he
addresses the citizens who would enter the antechapel from the Sala del
Mappamondo; in both, he extols the civic virtues of the Romans for the
Sienese to emulate. As "exemplum civile," reads the scroll, I show you these
men; if you follow in their sacred footsteps your fame will grow at home and
abroad, and liberty will always preserve your honour; while the titulus below
the figure proclaims: I am the great Aristotle, and I tell you in hexameters
about the men whose virtue made Rome so great that her power reached to
the sky.93 This message is elaborated in the central inscription on the main wall, and
in Italian-evidently for the benefit of those councillors who might find the
Latin hexameters too difficult: Take Rome as your example if you want to
rule a thousand years; follow the common good, and not selfish ends; and
give just counsel like these men. If you only remain united, your power and
fame will continue to grow as did that of the great people of Mars. Having
subdued the world, it lost its liberty because it ceased to be united.94
This, then, is the central concept of the programme; and it is closely akin
to that of the Lorenzetti frescoes. Once again, we find the ideals of the common good, of amor patriae, and of internal peace and unity; and here, too, power
and prosperity depend on the rule of justice; although there is a stronger
emphasis on the elements of freedom and power. The Roman heroes almost
seem to illustrate Remigio de' Girolami's praise of the virtuous Romans who
"plus... curabant de communi bono quam de proprio."95 It was only fitting
that Aristotle should have been chosen to serve as a guide to the antechapel;
for he provides the link between the philosophical allegory of the Sala de'
Nove with its Aristotelian theme and the historical exempla of the antechapel.
He still appears as the prime teacher of civic philosophy.
By 1413, cycles of "uomini famosi" had become a favourite subject for the
frescoing of princely and civic palaces.96 There were two main treatments of
this subject: the mediaeval tradition of the Nine Worthies,97 and the new
humanist glorification of classical antiquity. This new approach to the "uomi-
ni famosi" is shown in the frescoes which Francesco da Carrara the Elder
had painted in about 1370 in his palace in Padua, in close relation with
Petrarch's De viris illustribus and probably under his guidance;98 and half a
century later, in the frescoes of Famous Men in the Palazzo of the Trinci in
Foligno, which were probably completed in 1424.99 The new tradition was
not limited to princely courts; in about 1400 the humanist chancellor Coluccio
Salutati wrote tituli for a cycle of Famous Men in a hall of the Palazzo della
Signoria in Florence.100 The Sienese frescoes belong to this new humanist
tradition, and constitute, in fact, the earliest extant example of it in a city-
republic.101 This humanist approach is shown not only in the selection of the Famous Men from Roman history, but also in the literary form of the tituli;
these are in Latin hexameters and, like the epigrams by Salutati for Florence
and by Francesco da Fiano for Foligno,102 follow classical models.103 The very
way in which figure and inscription are combined may represent an attempt
to imitate ancient Roman statues with their elogia.104
But while the Sienese frescoes of famous men belong to the same tradition
as the cycles in Padua and Foligno, they are distinguished from the latter in
one significant respect. The famous Romans in Padua and Foligno were
citizens of the republic, kings, and emperors ;105 those in Siena belong ex-
clusively to the republican age. Indeed, they span the history of the Roman
republic from the beginning to the end-from the first Brutus to Caesar and
Brutus lunior; and in doing so, they appear both on an historical and on a
moral plane. The arrangement of the famous Romans in the Sienese frescoes is as
follows:
Medallions in the frieze
surrounding Fortitude:
P. Decius Mus
"Cato stoico" (Uticensis) 106
T. Manlius Torquatus
In the spandrel next to
Fortitude:
M. Iunius Brutus (P1. 19b)
Medallions in the frieze
surrounding Justice:
C. Mucius Scaevola
C. Fabricius
M. Curius Dentatus
Medallions in the frieze
surrounding Prudence:
M. Claudius Marcellus
L. Iunius Brutus
Q. Fabius Cunctator
In the spandrel next to
Prudence:
Caius Laelius (Pl. 19d)
Medallions in the frieze
surrounding Magnanimity:
Scipio Africanus Minor
P. Aemilius
M. Attilius Regulus In the continuation of the frieze on the lower level:
next to Justice: next to Magnanimity:
Appius Caecus M. Livius Drusus
Full-length figures on the lower level (P1. I9a):
under Justice: under Magnanimity:
Cicero M. Curius Dentatus
M. Porcius Cato (Uticensis) M. Furius Camillus
P. Scipio Nasica P. Scipio Africanus Major
In the arch, facing Aristotle:
Caesar and Pompey (P1. 18d)
On moral grounds alone, there was a strong case for selecting Roman
heroes from the republican age; St. Augustine, for one, had shown the way
to this, and he had formed the last link in a classical tradition. 10? In Leonardo
Bruni's Dialogi in Petrum Paulum Histrum, Coluccio Salutati, who had just
written his defence of Caesar in the De tyranno, says: ". .. nec parricidam fuisse
unquam putabo, nec unquam desinam Caesarem in caelum tollere pro magni-
tudine rerum quas gessit. Si tamen filii mei ad virtutem hortandi forent, vel
a Deo id petendum, potius equidem optarem, ut M. Marcello aut L. Camillo
similes essent, quam C. Caesari."10os The programme of the antechapel reflects
the same attitude. The moral significance of the republican heroes is empha-
sized by their connexion with the four virtues ofJustice, Magnanimity, Forti-
tude and Prudence, which form points of reference both for the portraits in
the medallions and for the six figures on the main wall. There is, however,
one exception to this scheme. The figures of Caesar and Pompey are not con-
nected with a virtue: they stand apart from the others, inside the arch leading
to the Sala del Mappamondo, opposite Aristotle who thus does not include
them when he points to the famous men on his left as exemplars of civic virtue.
The reason for this special treatment is explained by their titulus: As long as
they were "concordi mente", the "maiestas romana" shook the world with
awe; but blind ambition plunged them into civil war, in which Roman liberty
perished-"Ambitio sed ceca duos ubi traxit ad arma, / Libertas romana
perit..."109 They are thus meant to serve, unlike the other Roman citizens,
as deterrents rather than as models of civic virtue; and they illustrate the
warning contained in the central inscription that selfish ambition and disunity are bound to lead to political decline and loss of freedom. By illustrating the
causes not only of the greatness of republican Rome but also of its decline and
fall, they press home, on an historical as well as on a moral plane, the lesson
which the history of the Roman Republic could present to contemporary
Siena.
The cycle of famous Romans is completed by two frescoes of pagan divini-
ties and the circular map of Rome (P1. i7f) in the arch leading to the Sala del
Mappamondo. The map of Rome is in the apex of that arch, thus crowning
the main entrance to the antechapel; its position may be meant to illustrate
the words of the central inscription: "et saglirete al cielo . . . si come fecie il
gran popolo di Marte." The figures of Jupiter and Mars (P1. I8b),110 and
of Apollo and Pallas (P1. I8c), with their attributes, are above those of Aris-
totle and of Caesar and Pompey. As gods of war and peace, they symbolize
the distinction between military and civic exploits by which the six figures of
the main wall are divided into two groups. To the circular map of Rome11'
there corresponds, in the lunette of the antechapel, the virtue of Religio
(P1. i8e). The presence of this virtue here, together with the political virtues,
requires some explanation, the more so since the theological virtues had
already found their place in the chapel. In fact, Religio was not identical with
Fides: "Religio non est fides," says St. Thomas,112 "sed fidei protestatio per
aliqua exteriora signa;" through it "redditur debitum Deo." Moreover,
while Fides as one of the theological virtues was specifically Christian, Religio
was also a Roman virtue connected with the pagan cult. Religio, according
to Cicero, "superioris cuiusdam naturae, quam divinam vocant, curam
caerimoniamque affert."113 In our cycle, Religio holds a symbol of Christ,
and her inscription contains a Christian admonition;114 but enthroned as she
is above pagan deities, her character is ambivalent. The author of the
programme evidently wished to use a term which could apply equally to
Christian and to Roman religion-one century before Machiavelli claimed
that the latter was one of the prime sources of the greatness of republican
Rome. 115
With remarkable coherence of thought, the cycle of the antechapel tries to
convey the lesson which could be derived from Roman republican greatness
and the decline which set in when disunity and ambition gained the upper
hand over civic virtue. Let us look into the antecedents of this concept. The
view that the decline of Rome was due to civic strife goes back to classical authors such as Sallust, and had been handed on to the Middle Ages by St.
Augustine;116 but it had assumed a new significance in the faction-torn Italian
communes. Already Brunetto Latini had advised the podestd to warn the
citizens of the example of "Romme et les autres bonnes viles ki por la guerre
dedens sont decheues et mal alees" ;117 and the Sienese frescoes express the
same sentiment which is contained, later on, in Matteo Palmieri's Della vita
civile: "I1 singulare et amplissimo imperio della citta di Roma ... solamente
dalle discordie civili e stato in estreme afflizioni e miserie condotto . . . Le
divisioni civili sono quelle che sempre hanno disfatto e per l'advenire dis-
faranno ogni republica . . . Piglino esemplo coloro che posseggono la dolce
libertY; imparino dalle ruine altrui resistere e riparare alle proprie."118 The
condemnation of Caesar as responsible for the destruction of the libertas romana
already appears in fourteenth-century literature; at the beginning of the
fifteenth century it was vigorously voiced by Leonardo Bruni, while Salutati
in contrast follows the traditional glorification of Caesar.119 In the controversy
over Caesar, the Sienese frescoes represent the republican view of Cino
Rinuccini and Leonardo Bruni, while Salutati's epigram on Caesar for
Florence120 and Francesco da Fiano's for the Salone dei Giganti at Foligno
conform to the traditional panegyric pattern.121 It is therefore not surprising
to find Brutus, whom Dante had placed in the lowest circle of Hell,122 among
the exemplars of civic virtue, in an exalted position in one of the two large
medallions, next to the virtue of Fortitude.
The republican approach to Roman history is, however, most forcefully
expressed in the principal figures on the main wall of the antechapel, and
particularly by the group on the left. Of these, two were defenders of Roman
republican liberty against subversion and tyranny, while the third, Scipio
Nasica, vir optimus, appears in Roman literature as a signal example of civic
virtue; Valerius Maximus calls him "togatae potentiae clarissimum lumen." The inscription under the figures of Cicero and Cato explain that they both
gave their life in the service of freedom, and that it was Cato who named
Cicero pater patriae.124 Let us briefly consider the sources of these figures and
of their inscriptions.
Scipio Nasica had had a curious fate in antiquity; Valerius Maximus com-
bined four different men of this name, each the father of the next, into one
exemplar of Roman patriotism-perhaps intentionally so; and other Roman
authors also confused the Scipio Nasica vir optimus who brought the image of
Cybele to Rome in 204 B.c., with his son Scipio Nasica Corculum who opposed
Cato the Censor's demand that Carthage should be destroyed (according to
tradition, because he was convinced that Rome's healthy development de-
pended on the preservation of that city) and his grandson Scipio Nasica
Serapio who led the assassination of Tiberius Gracchus in 132 B.C.125 The
confusion between the first and second Scipio Nasica can also be found in
Petrarch's Rerum Memorandarum libri.126 In 1400, Coluccio Salutati raised
the question of the identity of the various Scipio Nasicas in a long digression
in his De tyranno, and criticized Valerius Maximus for believing that Scipio
Nasica vir optimus could be the same as the leader of the Senate against Tiberius
Gracchus; but he too seems to assume that he was identical with his son,
the opponent of Cato the Censor.127 So does our titulus: it only combines
the two first Scipio Nasicas, without following Valerius Maximus' reference
to the third; and by doing so, conforms to the approach of contemporary
humanism. 128
The principal source of the inscription on Cicero seems to have been either
Plutarch's Life of Cicero, which had recently been translated into Latin by
Jacopo Angeli,129 or Leonardo Bruni's biography of Cicero (in which he used
this translation freely), written almost contemporaneously with the painting
of our frescoes, in about 1414-130 In this work Bruni, like Salutati before him, praised Cicero as an exemplar of republican virtue-in contrast to the
mediaeval view of him as a Stoic sage, a view which had still been shared by
Petrarch.131 Our titulus follows the new approach to Cicero among Florentine
humanists, which received its fullest expression in Bruni's Cicero novus. On the
other hand, the inscription on Cato reflects a view which had been held in
the Italian communes for a long time; thus Remigio de' Girolami says of him
that "interfecit se ipsum, ut aliqui opinantur, quia dominium urbis venerat
ad manus Iulii Caesaris, existimans ex hoc rem publicam in magnum peri-
culum incidisse."132 Dante praised the sacrifice "severissimi vere libertatis
auctoris,"'133 and in about 1400 the Florentine Cino Rinuccini writes of "il
frutto della bella libertY, per la quale non dubit6 morire quello esquisitissimo
Cato posteriore."134 Thus traditional republican views were combined with
new humanist interpretations in the representation of the three Roman
exemplars of civic virtue.
While Cicero and the younger Cato personify Roman republican patriotism
in its resistance to tyranny, Furius Camillus and Curius Dentatus (on the right
side of the wall) provide a historical connexion between the civic virtues of
ancient Rome and contemporary Siena. According to a classical tradition
found, for instance, in the Epitome of Livy, the colony of Senae was established
during the consulate of M. Curius Dentatus.135 It seems at least possible that
the author of the programme of the frescoes knew of this tradition and conse-
quently selected Curius Dentatus as one of his principal heroes.136 But the
connexion is quite explicit in the case of Furius Camillus; for the titulus under
this figure137 states that one of the Sienese Terzi, that of Camollia, owed its
name to it: "nostro de nomine dicta est / Camillia tue pars urbis terna
senensis." Thus Camillus appears among the republican heroes of Rome
not only as an exemplar of civic virtue but also as one of the founders of
Siena.
What are the sources of this part of the programme? Once more, we can
recognize the influence of humanist scholarship. The Neoptolemus mentioned
in M. Curius Dentatus' epigram was the son of Achilles, from whom the Pyrrhi claimed to be descended.138 The story of Curius Dentatus' victories
over the Samnites and over Pyrrhus, and of his contempt for the Samnite gold,
is told by many Roman authors;139 that of his refusal to accept the treacherous
offer of Pyrrhus' physician140 is based on a confusion with C. Fabricius, for
which Florus appears to be the only authority.141 As to the inscription for
M. Furius Camillus, it combines classical sources and local tradition on the
foundation of Siena. Livy, and after him Florus and other authors, relate
Camillus' victory over the Gauls, his pursuit of them, and his restoration of
Rome ;142 that Camillus took part in the foundation of Siena, on the other
hand, was a local Sienese legend which we find recorded for the first time in
the fifteenth century, although it was doubtless of earlier origin.
Siena, like most other Italian towns, prided herself on her classical origins
-although these were not so easy to prove as, for instance, those of Florence,
where many Roman remains survived throughout the Middle Ages;143 the
Florentine Giovanni Villani altogether denied that the city had existed in
antiquity, and maintained that it had been founded by Charles Martel, who
left all his aged and infirm men there on his departure from Italy.144 John of
Salisbury records a celebris traditio according to which Siena owed its origins
to the Galli Senones under Brennus.145 This "Gallic" tradition, which is also
recorded by Fazio degli Uberti,146 was in Siena in the fifteenth century
"communis incolarum opinio."147 Agostino Patrizi, in his De antiquitate civitatis
Senensis,148 reports it in the following fashion: the Gauls, "post direptam
incensamque Romam, domum repetentes ... illuc contendisse, ubi tunc Senae
sunt conditae .. ." Agostino Dati speaks of the theory of the Gallic foundation
of Siena as one of the two prevalent explanations of the origins of the city:
it was opposed by those who maintained Siena's Roman origins-"urbis
originem, de qua Galli praesertim Senones ac veteres Romani certant."149
It is not surprising to find Sienese humanists as exponents of the Roman
theory. Whatever the origins of her name, says Dati, "illud certo affirmare pos-
sumus, matrem Senensem populum profiteri urbem Romam."150 This belief
was, apparently, confirmed by an old history of Siena's antiquities, which
was purported to be the work of "Tisbo Colonnese," and to have been dis-
covered in Rome at the beginning of the fourteenth century, but which was
probably composed in Siena in the fifteenth century.151 According to the
Tisbo legend, Senio and Aschio, the sons of Remus, fled from Romulus, taking
with them the image of the wolf with the twins. On reaching the banks of the
Tressa, they built the castle Senio (later Castelvecchio), defeated troops from
Rome and two kings, Montonius and Camelius, who finally settled down with
them in the new city.152 The district where Camelius pitched his camp came
to be called Camporegio; "e disteselo infino ala via oltramontana, dove in su
la via edifich6 una forteza di legniame ... questa e la via di Chamellio ... e
al presenti si dicie Kamollia."153 If the legendary king Camelius thus appears
as "el nostro avolo," for the Sienese humanists the historic Camillus could
fulfil the same function much better, for he could do so on grounds of classical
evidence, however freely interpreted. The pursuit of the Gauls by the saviour
of Rome which Florus relates'54 tended to suggest that there was some con-
nexion between Camillus and the terzo Camollia; and according to Agostino
Patrizi, the communis opinio of the Sienese in his time was that, while the Galli
Senones had founded Siena, Camillus had been responsible for the terzo Camol-
lia, for it was there that he had pitched his camp before defeating them.155
"Quamvis absurda haec, et impossibilia non esse putem," adds Agostino
Patrizi, it is certain "esse autem hanc urbem antiquam et Romanorum
coloniam," as can be proved from the evidence of coins, from such authors as
Pliny and Tacitus, from the "Romani populi insignia, civitati concessa" and
from the "fama vulgaris" ;156 and Francesco Patrizi clinches the matter by
making Camillus responsible for establishing this colony, and not only the
terzo Camollia to which he gave his name, and which "candido vexillo ex etustissimo archetypo ductam Camilli effigiem obstendit."'57 Thus in the
fifteenth century Furius Camillus was accepted as one of the founders of Siena;
our inscription is, in fact, the earliest evidence of a thesis that was bound to
appeal to humanist criticism more than the Tisbo legend, for which, with the
best will in the world, no support could be found in classical authorities.
The revision of foundation legends on the basis of classical texts had led
in Florence, shortly before the completion of our frescoes, to a break with the
mediaeval tradition, according to which Florence owed her origins to Caesar.
The humanists Salutati and Leonardo Bruni maintained, and adduced for
this the evidence of Cicero and Sallust, that Florence had been founded as a
colony for Sulla's veterans. This new approach to the antiquities of Florence
had its political implications; for it showed that the Florentine republic, the
self-styled bulwark against Visconti despotism, owed its origins to the Roman
republic and not to Caesar.'58 This republican re-interpretation we find fully
developed in Leonardo Bruni's Laudatio urbis Florentinae, which was written in
the first years of the century, 59 and in the first book of his Historiae Florentini
populi, which was finished in I415,160 the year after the completion of the
frescoes in the antechapel.
There can be no doubt that the tituli of our frescoes, as well as the pro-
gramme as a whole, derive their inspiration from contemporary humanism,
and it is probable that there is either a direct or indirect connection with the
Florentine humanists. The admiration of the Roman republic as an example
for the contemporary city-republic, though not new, was given vigorous and
more articulate expression in the writings of Leonardo Bruni; and in his History
ofFlorence we also find the concept which underlies the programme of the ante-
chapel-that the decline of Rome began with the fall of the republic.'6'
While the historical approach to the uominifamosi cycle itself appears to reflect humanist enthusiasm for Roman history, the Aristotelian element in the pro-
gramme would equally have met with the approval of humanists like Bruni.l62
On October 13, I413, Pietro de' Pecci and Ser Cristoforo di Andrea had
been put in charge, as will be remembered, of the supervision of the new fres-
coes for the antechapel; on November i, Pecci was sent as ambassador to
Florence.163 One of the purposes of this embassy was to confer with John
XXIII before his departure for Bologna,164 which took place a few days later.
The Pope had been staying outside Florence since June, when he fled from
Rome after its capture by King Ladislas of Naples; he had brought the Curia
with him,165 among them Leonardo Bruni, who had been apostolic secretary
since 1405-166 It would have been strange if Pecci had not taken advantage
of the opportunity offered by his embassy to discuss the programme of the
antechapel with some of the scholars who were then in Florence, and to secure
their advice and help; and it is tempting to think that one of them may have
been Leonardo Bruni himself.167 Such a course of action would have been
natural enough for a man like Pietro de' Pecci, who was a lawyer of some distinction, and later one of Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini's teachers at the
University of Siena.l68
But apart from such humanist contacts, there were also other circum-
stances which in 1413 could have helped to bring about a specifically Floren-
tine inspiration of the new Sienese cycle of frescoes. Those years were one of
the rare periods when Florence and Siena stood united in defence of their
independence. At the turn of the century, Florence had fought Giangaleazzo
Visconti single-handed, while Siena had accepted his rule; but now the two
Tuscan republics were united in their resistance to King Ladislas of Naples
who, after taking Rome, was pressing north, thus resuming his advance into
Tuscany of 1409, which had been halted by the Florentine-Sienese league.169
For the Florentines, in their struggle against Visconti expansion, the defence
of their political independence had been tantamount with that of their re-
publican regime;170 they had time and again sought to defend both by
concluding leagues with other Tuscan republics; and much the same implica-
tions were again present in their resistance to Ladislas.171 In Siena, on the
other hand, the republican regime had been restored after Giangaleazzo's
death in 1402, and provided a further bond with Florence in their common
action against Ladislas. Florentine republicanism in its new humanist
formulation may therefore have proved particularly attractive to Florence's
ally in those years. It seems, in these circumstances, hardly a coincidence that
the programme of the antechapel centres on three citizens who upheld Rome's
republican regime at home and three who defended her independence in the
field: a combination which would have come naturally enough to Florentine
political humanism of the early Quattrocento.
The humanist inspiration of the programme and the inscriptions of the
antechapel may also have left their mark on the execution of the frescoes. We
have seen that the combination of figure and titulus probably presented an
attempt to imitate ancient statues and elogia ;172 the architectural setting of
the principal figures in an open portico may equally have been influenced by
information regarding the statues in ancient Roman fora and temples, as, for
instance, in the Forum Augusti, although the execution of the arcade is tradi-
tional enough.'73 The armour of the three Roman generals is evidently
intended to reproduce ancient armour, as is shown, for instance, by the lion- heads on Scipio Africanus' greaves.174 Like Roman legionaries, they carry
sword and pilum, and in the case of Curius Dentatus and Scipio Africanus, the
clipeus;175 Furius Camillus wears on his head a fillet which bears some resem-
blance to the corona civica as found on Roman monuments.176 But the artistic
vocabulary of the figures is still basically Trecento, with the addition of
elements derived from classical sources.177 Much the same is also true of the
dress of the citizens, which represents a not very successful fusion of contem-
porary civic dress and the Roman toga. The pagan gods follow mediaeval
iconographical tradition, but the execution is simpler and less overloaded with
allegory.178 As we have seen, the acanthus frieze round the virtues, with its inserted
medallions, bears some resemblance to the jambs of the Porta della Mandorla
in Florence.179 This frieze is continued on the main wall alongside the figures
of the six Roman heroes, down to the bottom of the frescoes; in that on the
right, next to the figure of Scipio Africanus, we find two putti, one of them
facing the Roman hero and blowing a horn. Both by their position within the
acanthus and their execution they have much in common with those of the
Porta della Mandorla.i80 Professor Krautheimer has recently emphasized the
antique inspiration of these figures as well as of the acanthus scrolls of the
Porta della Mandorla, although much of the execution is pseudo-classical ;181
and the same seems to apply, in a more modest fashion, to Taddeo di Bartolo's
putti (P1. 19c), which may be influenced by the Florentine model, and indeed
to some of his figures of Romans and pagan gods. However, while the masters
of the Porta della Mandorla used classical models, Taddeo di Bartolo seems
to have tried primarily to bring up to date a traditional artistic vocabulary
by infusing into it elements based on literary information rather than visual
knowledge. That the result is somewhat bizarre is not surprising; but what
matters to us above all is the intention; and, indeed, perhaps the very inade-
quacies of Taddeo di Bartolo's pseudo-classical figures reflect some of the
problems of a period when links began to be forged between humanism and
art.182
The Sienese citizen who, coming from the Sala de' Nove, entered the ante-
chapel from the Sala del Mappamondo, found himself in a memorial hall of
Roman republican heroes with pagan divinities, which formed a curious con-
trast to the adjoining chapel. At the same time, he would find here the same political concepts which had been expressed in a rudimentary way in the
'Maesta' and then, in a much more complex and philosophical fashion, in the
allegories of the Sala de' Nove; justice and the common good as the basic
principles of good government, and the all-importance of internal peace and
unity for the preservation of the state. Thus in the new language of humanism,
the political philosophy of Trecento Siena finds a fresh formulation which may
have satisfied both traditionalists and modernists.
From now onwards, the use of Roman republican heroes remained a
permanent feature of Sienese civic art. In 1445 we find Cicero with Mucius
Scaevola and the first Brutus in a fresco (P1. 2oc) in the town hall of Lucignano,
a small but strategically important Sienese town on the border of Florence's
territory;183 in 1464, Antonio Federighi decorated one of the marble seats of
the Loggia di Mercanzia in Siena with reliefs of Roman citizens and soldiers,
including the first Brutus, Cato Uticensis and, probably, Furius Camillus
(P1. 20a).184 And when in 1529 the Sienese government commissioned yet
another cycle of frescoes for its palace, this time for the Sala del Concistoro,
Domenico Beccafumi based his programme once more on a combination of
virtues and Roman citizens, with the addition of Greek heroes.185 The images
and portraits of Taddeo di Bartolo are replaced by historical scenes, and the
virtues have been further reduced in number; but side by side with Justice
and Concord we find Patrie Amor (P1. 2ob), which condenses in one single
concept most of the political ideals of the earlier frescoes.'se To teach civic
virtues by pictorial representation had remained a tradition dear to the
Sienese,'87 and the spell of the Roman republic had survived the despotism
of Pandolfo Petrucci.8"